 The Calamity Lore Document 

Hello, and welcome to the new Calamity Lore Document, also known simply as CAL. Here, I have collected all of the lore currently in the mod, and have curated it for easier consumption, including building a timeline based on the information given to us by the Lore items, NPC quotes, the Bestiary and a bit more. However, before we proceed, a little clarification is needed in some matters…

A Quick Summary…

The Calamity lore is simply the story of the world, told to us, as of right now, by Yharim, a prominent figure of the mod’s story that we will dive into later in this same Document. Several times, the Calamity lore has been rewritten to gradually become a more cohesive narrative, but as of Update 2.0.2.001 the Developers have integrated into the game what they consider to be the definitive version of the story, and that it will not be changed in the future. That said, this document should not be taken as gospel, as the lore is still subject to change. As such, this does not mean it will contain every detail of the story, as much of it is still shrouded in mystery. As of now, we have the outline of the story, the names of the main figures, and the core elements that will be expanded upon in the future.
With that said, almost everything else that is in the game is canon, that is, exists within the story of Calamity. If you see anything in the Wiki that does not match what is ingame, then either it has not been updated yet or the site you are using is a fan created project, like the Total Calamity Wiki. Of course, however, the developers are only human, and some outdated information may be still left in the game. If you see something that directly conflicts with the Calamity lore, then please, bring this up in the Lore Discussion channel. As for this document, if anything is outdated I ask you to tell me about it, preferably in my DMs on Discord, @octolinggrimm. Finally, before we finally dive head first into the lore, I wished to thank all of the developers that have worked on the wonderful story of the Calamity Mod.

Cei
Lilac
StipulateVenus
Atalya
Ozzatron
Rebecca
Finally, I present to you…



Lore Items

Here, I will quote every single Lore Item in the game, in its entirety, and then quickly explain what they tell us, together with a small glossary for words that aren’t so well known. Specially important facts will be colored in various colors depending on who they are tied to. Bestiary entries for each applicable boss are present directly below the entry.

 Awakening 

The tombs of the Dragons stir. My eyes lift to see ancient dust dancing from high ledges.
These grand wings… How long has it been since I was a hero worthy of their name?
It feels like centuries have passed, yet all I've done is blink.
Look upon my works, as they are… Ruined. None would dare seek me out; tread my path.
Naught awaits them in this cruel world.

- This Lore Item is obtained at the very start of the game, and serves as a quick introduction to the others that will follow.
- There is someone talking to you in these items, in this case, Yharim.
- Yharim was a hero that fell from grace.

Naught: Nothing.

 King Slime 

Given time, these gelatinous creatures absorb each other and slowly grow in both size and strength.
There is little need to worry about this. Naturally, slimes are nearly mindless and amass only by chance.
Though it appears they are capable of absorbing knowledge, if only in rudimentary form.

- Slimes can be intelligent, somewhat.




 Desert Scourge 

Once, it was a majestic sea serpent that threatened none but the microscopic creatures it consumed.
After Ilmeris was incinerated, it became familiar with the hunt. To survive, it quickly learned to seek greater prey.
Unfortunately for the scourge, it seems that it too was prey in the end. After all, there is always a bigger fish in the sea.

- This creature was from a place called Ilmeris, which was incinerated.
Desert Scourge
A sea serpent that once swam through the waters of the Ilmeran Sea, it curiously chose to stay in its home rather than find a new one deep below. Quickly taking to a diet of antlion and cactus, it was able to take the place of possibly the desert’s apex predator after its only competition went into hiding.

-Desert Scourge once roamed the Ilmeran Sea, but when the Incineration happened, it chose to remain in the area rather than flee as so many others had done.
-The Desert Scourge is potentially the apex predator of the Desert, due to the Great Sand Shark having fled because of the Incineration.

 The Eye of Cthulhu 

In ages past, heroes made names for themselves facing such monsters.
Now they run rampant, spawning from vile influences left unchecked. They blend well with the horrific injustice of their forebears.
Slaying one merely paves the way for a dozen more. Surely this does not concern you, either.

- There are several monsters just like the Eye of Cthulhu.
- They spawn from “vile influences left unchecked” 
- Their forebears were unjust.

Forebears: Ancestors.

 Crabulon 

Fungus and a sea crab. One sought a host; the other, a new home.
These mushrooms possess a disturbing amount of tenacity. Nothing that lays down to die in their domain is left to rest.
It is this sort of ghastly, forceful exertion of control over the unwilling that led me down my path.

- The mushrooms from the glowing mushroom biome are parasites that infect and control the dead.
- Yharim walked down his path because of someone or something exerting control over the non-consenting.
Crabulon
A crustacean that once made its home in the heart of the Ilmeran Sea, managing to escape during the Great Incineration. Crabulon fled underground, enjoying the familiar blue glow given off by glowing mushrooms. Though it succumbed to the spores, it died in peace, reminded of its home.

-This one is actually pretty interesting. It shows that Crabulon was originally from Ilmeris, and that they were alive at the time of the Great Incineration. It died, unfortunately, surrounded by Glowing Mushrooms as the mushroom spores overtook it.

 The Crimson and The Corruption 

The foul air, the morbid fauna, the disgusting terrain… Here lies my first mistake of my crusade.
The essence of a God does not simply vanish when the body dies. It must be properly disposed of or destroyed entirely.
Essence of a pious God could never fester into a mire as dreadful as this.

To not properly dispose of the essence of a slain God is a fatal mistake. This wasteland stands as proof of such.
Having slain my first Gods, I turned a blind eye as corrupt essence gushed from their rent forms and burrowed into the bowels of Terraria.
The mere existence of this putrid place proves that the Gods of old were beyond redemption.

- Once a God dies, their corpse must be properly disposed of, or else they will warp into biomes like the Crimson or the Corruption
- Yharim killed Gods, crusading against them.
- The Gods that he killed were terrible people.

Pious: Merciful.
Mire: Mud.
Gush: Burst.

 Brain of Cthulhu 

It is true that unspeakable abominations may now be commonplace, largely by my hand.
Though they have always been a product of the folly of the Gods, the same Gods would cull them in equal measure.
My decimation of the falsely divine left many old horrors unconstrained, with new ones birthed every year.
Now, they are your stepping stones.

- Creatures like the Brain of Cthulhu have always existed despite being more common now.
- The Gods were the cause for several of them, and would kill them as well.

Folly: Foolishness.
Cull: Kill.
 The Eater of Worlds 

Any powerful being will call forth fable and legend, of both its grandeur and terror. That monstrous worm was no exception.
That measly thing, devouring a planet? Ridiculous. However, ridicule spreads quickly with even an ounce of truth behind it.
One will not need to search long for examples. We are all surrounded by rampant superstition and assumption.
I myself have been subjected to a litany of baseless boasts and accusations in my time.

- Yharim has been subject to lies about his behavior and actions.

A litany of…: Many.
 The Perforators and Their Hive 

These creatures were unique, for they wielded the slain Gods' power as purely as possible, veins flowing with spilt ichor.
All that exists in the Crimson is truly the divine turned inside out; their gore now glistens with its perverse treachery, for all to bear witness.
The mire reeks of centuries of vile manipulation and callous domination of the hapless.
Judgment is long passed, and extinction is left waiting.

- The Gods that formed the Crimson were truly detestable.
- Yeah that’s about it, they were just really bad and Yharim made sure everyone saw that.

Glisten: Reflect, often of something wet.
Callous: Insensible.
Hapless: Unfortunate.
The Perforator Hive
To tear and consume, taking for only themselves until there is nothing left– this was the primal instinct left behind by the gods which now form the Crimson. Their selfish desires coalesced into this hive, infested by ravenous worms whose sole desire is to devour.



The Perforators
A living embodiment of some of the worst this world has to offer, these parasites made full use of their hive. Using it to seek ever more to gorge themselves upon, they sought to grow even larger, that they may one day perhaps regain what they lost.

-The Perforator Hive is a coalescence of the selfish desires of many slain Gods.
-The Perforators are parasites who exploit the Perforator Hive to feed upon as much as possible.
-They have lost something of value, judging by their desire to regain it.

 The Hive Mind 

Some semblance of a God's mind may survive death, like the twitches of a crushed insect.
What little remains attempts to convene, to coalesce in worship, so that its power may yet be restored. How pitiful.
Fortunately for us, the futility of this effort is unmatched. The biomass obeys, but nothing is accomplished.
Far from all divine power flows from faith. A God is forged of its own strength; followers may choose to worship.

- Once a God dies, its corpse can try to come back, to no avail.
- We get a little bit closer to the definition of a God, a being forged by its own strength, that people may choose to worship for various reasons, some of which we will get into later.
The Hive Mind 
Although Yharim's campaign would one day span the entire world, it all started in these lands with the massacre of ruthless dictator deities. As soon as their leaders fell at the hands of the Godseeker, their armies toppled like dominos. A hive mind cannot function without its brain, after all.

-Yharim’s crusade started here, in the Corruption.
-Yharim slaughtered many Gods here.

 Queen Bee 

While of tremendous size, these creatures are docile until aggravated. Their idyllic demeanor is a rarity nowadays, a thing of beauty.
In the past, entire villages would spring up around these grand hives, peacefully harvesting their share of the honey and protecting them from danger.
Though its death is understandable given the circumstances, I do feel pity for these majestic beings.
Fate was cruel to many of their kind.

- People lived in the Jungle around the honeycombs.
- Yharim likes bees.

Idyllic: Peaceful.
 Skeletron 

A sorry old man, cursed by an even older cult, caught trespassing on their ancient library.
They were once my friends. Their leader is infatuated with Dragons, and dreams of resurrecting one.
The very walls of that place are cursed further still. The magic has long since faded, and the soldiers rotted.
Do not expect to learn much from those tattered tomes. They were penned with misguided zeal.

- A cult existed in the Dungeon, whose leader wished of resurrecting a dragon.

Penned: Written.

 Slime God 

An old clan once revered this thing as a paragon of the balance of nature. Now its purity is sullied by freshly absorbed muck and grime.
The gelatinous being neither knows nor cares for the last surviving clansman.
Such tragedy is all too common in worship.
Alas, the Slime God is wise enough to be cowardly. Fleeing battles it cannot win when its servants are destroyed.
Perhaps fortune will favor you if you catch it unaware.

- A clan revered the Slime God. (More details later)
- The last member of said clan is still alive. (More details later)
- The Slime God managed to flee the encounter.

Sullied: Tainted, dirty.
The Slime God
Despite being a Gluttonous slime, the Slime God forbids itself from growing out of control to maintain the balance of the world. It was still pursued during the Crusade, but it managed to survive through countless strategic retreats. The duty it upholds and the methods it employs are the reason the Onyx Kinsmen worship such a puny deity.

-The Slime God consumed the Auric Soul of the Dragon of Gluttony.
-It upholds a duty, which is the reason why the Onyx Kinsmen worship them.

 The Underworld 


The hellish reputation the underworld gets is rather a modern thing.
The layers of ash choking the formerly great cities are still warm.
The more domineering of Gods wished for me to champion their cause, and rule their society from here.
Yet, surrounded by magma as it were, Azafure simply burned when their wishes were not met.
Such is the unfortunate price of war, though I have no regrets fighting for my people.

- The Underworld was full of great cities until recently, relatively speaking.
- Gods wished for Yharim to lead their cause and rule society from there (More details later)
- Azafure was destroyed during the war.

Domineering: Asserting one’s will in an arrogant way.
Champion: Lead.

 Wall of Flesh 

To contain the essence of a slain God is no small thing. It is rather a towering, ghastly construct.
The Wall was lashed together with foul sinew and fouler magics, forming a rudimentary prison of flesh.
It served its purpose: halting the diffusion of undue divine influence.
Were it not for this alchemical breakthrough, the very world I fought for may have been lost in the carnage I wrought.
My methods have since evolved. I need not contain such essences, when they can be devoured.
May you channel my valor in combating the resulting outpour of energies.

- The Wall of Flesh is a construct made to contain godly essence.
- Yharim now has a way for godly essence to be devoured, making things like the Wall of Flesh unneeded.

Sinew: Refers to the physical materials used to build the Wall.
Undue: Excessive.

 Blood Moon 

This malevolence is not the work of any God. Blood moons trace their origins to the dawn of history.
It is an occurrence equally sinister and banal. Everyone is acclimated to the shambling hordes of undead.
Organized societies are not threatened in the slightest. If anything, they welcome the opportunity to train green foot soldiers.
Those with fire in their veins may strike out on their own, to revel in the slaughter.
That is how I remember the sleepless nights from my younger days… Knee deep in corpses.

- Seriously this one doesn’t really tell much outside of explaining how Blood Moons are viewed in the world, which in this case is not that serious at all. People are used to it already even, organized societies use it to train soldiers and stronger people just straight up have fun during it.

Banal: Boringly common.

 Queen Slime 

Having fled after your battle, it seems the Slime God fashioned a new guardian from the unleashed essences.
Ensnared in the absorption process of its newfound power… it could not flee again.
Or perhaps it was overcome by arrogance or desperation.
A glorious hunt, a fine foe. Now you know you must chase them to the ends of Terraria.

- You killed the Slime God, once and for all.
- The last line refers to Gods in general.

Ensnared: Stuck.

 The Archmage 

He yet lives?! I thought him slain by Calamitas. It appears she imprisoned the Archmage to spare his life.
I assumed that frigid mass was an old construct of his, running amok without its master to shepherd it.
Permafrost was an old ally of mine, wielding the prestigious title of Archmage and great renown.
His wisdom guided my original conquests, making much of them possible at all.
As my crusade evolved and my ambitions grew, he expressed vehement disapproval.
Where justice was once seen, tyranny had blinded it. He departed and the Witch not long after.

- Yharim believed Permafrost had been slain by Calamitas (more details later).
- Permafrost was one of the first allies Yharim had.
- The Archmage was one of the most important pieces of his army, making several of his initial conquests possible.
- Once Yharim started to fall, Permafrost left, and Calamitas soon followed.

Amok: Frenzied.
Vehement: Strong.
Cryogen
When Yharim realized that the Archmage had defected, Calamitas was ordered to hunt down and kill her former mentor. After a tearful confrontation, she decided to instead seal him away, and fake his death. The spellwork present in this living seal is inspired, and a tragic homage to every lesson Permafrost taught his student.

-Permafrost was imprisoned within Cryogen by Calamitas in an attempt to protect him. 
-Cryogen is a seal created by Calamitas using the teachings of Permafrost.
-Yharim had lied about the cause of Permafrost’s disappearance, putting the blame on Calamitas instead of himself.

 The Mechanical Trio 

These unwieldy beasts of steel were the experiments of Draedon, my former colleague and prodigious engineer. His intent was to fuel a war machine with soul energy, allowing it to fight with purpose and zeal. 
The creations were a success; so much so, that the souls continued to express their own free will. Draedon was displeased with the results. However these were my soldiers with their loyalty forged anew in iron. I dismissed them from duty, and yet they linger here still. Scouring the land for evidence of the divine. 
Unfortunately for you that puts you in their crosshairs. Give them a battle worth dying in.

- Draedon was Yharim’s former colleague and engineer.
- He created the Mechanical Trio in an experiment with souls.
- They were used to combat the Gods, forged from Yharim’s previous soldiers' souls.

 The Twins 

Not all of warfare is direct combat. Logistics, intelligence and wit are paramount in equal ways to ensure victory.
These machines are my finest scouts and agents, reborn in a form that gives them sight unrivaled.
An enemy is only as safe as you allow him to be: Archers, spies, assassins and more allow you to keep a decisive edge.
Draedon understood well that the only fair fight is the one you win.
His assistance was infallible, and his calculus cold and cruel.
Not even the most evasive target stood a chance.

- The Twins played the role of hunting down any foe. Considering the statement in Queen Slime Lore Item, they were certainly useful in finding Gods that may have been too evasive.

 Sulphur Sea 

This seaside has never been pleasant, though it has seen far better days.
Incessant fumes rising from the industry of Azafure inundate the water with caustic ions.
Despite this, the hardy life adapted to the new environment. No doubt aided by Silva as she burrowed through to the underworld.
Long considered uninhabitable, its further deterioration led Draedon to designate it as a dumping ground.
Years of careless waste disposal has now left the coast's transformation irreversible.

- The Sulphur Sea has always been stinky. Azafure inhabitants were the culprits because of the industry there.
 - Silva, Goddess of Life, aided life to adapt to the new environment.
- Draedon made the Sulphur Sea stinkier.

 Aquatic Scourge 

Another once grand sea serpent, well-adapted to its harsh environs.
Unlike the other Scourge, which was half starved and chasing scraps for its next meal; it lived comfortably.
Microorganisms evolve rapidly, so it was able to maintain its filter feeding habits as the sea putrefied.
What a stark contrast to the rest of the ecosystem. Nearly every other creature in the Sulphur Sea is hostile.
A shame that its last bastion of tranquility has fallen.

- The Aquatic Scourge is a relative to the Desert Scourge, adapted to this environment.
- Unlike many other bosses, this one is confirmed to be non-hostile.

Stark: Sharp.
Aquatic Scourge
A peaceful yet intimidating being that roamed the Sulphurous Sea, its mere existence was enough to scare away most creatures from the shore. Without its presence to act as a deterrent, fearsome predators now feel safe to prowl during the acidic storms.

-Despite being a passive creature, Aquatic Scourge apparently served as a deterrent to many strong creatures from being in the Sulphurous Sea.
-This entry also explains the reason as to why the Acid Rain gets buffed after Aquatic Scourge’s defeat.

 The Destroyer 

The Godseeker Knights of my company were by far my finest soldiers.
They championed my cause, and I championed them in return.
I bestowed upon them hulking armor and colossal weaponry, so their might would never falter.
Some days I would take time to train by their side, inspiring them to new heights of righteous fury.
Draedon understood well, and granted them these massive forms. Bristling with weaponry and interlocked armor forged of blessed metal.
While in truth it was repurposed mining equipment, their sheer presence on the battlefield was immense.

- The Destroyer helped in a very simple manner Yharim’s cause: being really strong.
- The Hallowed Metal it is made of is blessed, in some way.

 Azafure 

Oft called the First City, its tumultuous history stretches back to the Draconic Era.
An odd jewel of civilization, the immense heat of the underworld provided it unlimited potential in defense and industry.
Such were the abilities of the forgemasters that when I swayed them to my cause, I was never lacking for arms.
It pains me to say even in hindsight, but their artisanry paved the downfall of the entire city.
For the Witch and I… the air here will forever be laden with regret. There is nothing to be done.

- Azafure is often claimed to have been the First City.
- The city had several forgemasters that supplied Yharim’s army with abundant weaponry.
- This artisanry is what provoked the city’s downfall, for unknown reasons.
- For some reason, Yharim and Calamitas regret whatever happened here.

Swayed: Brought to…
Laden: Full of…

 Brimstone Elemental 

A peculiar being. Until recently, she had laid dormant for ages, posing as the city's silent matron.
As its economy boomed, traces of brimstone found their way all across the known world.
It was never clear why her slumber ended. At first she stirred. The people were cautiously optimistic.
When she woke, it was horrific. Inferno billowed through the streets. None were safe from the flames.
Fate had a sick sense of humor that day, for Calamitas to be there to match her.
Perhaps the two were attuned somehow…
They fought to a standstill, fire against fire.
Neither were victorious, with the city razed by flames despite her intention.

- The Brimstone Elemental was the cause of Azafure’s downfall.
- Calamitas and the Elemental fought, and their battle ravaged the city completely. It is unsure exactly who played the bigger role in this matter, however.
- The Brimstone Elemental started to appear as Azafure’s economy peaked.
- It is unclear why she woke up.

Matron: Matriarch.
Billowed: Ran rampant…
Brimstone Elemental
Roused from her deep slumber in relatively recent years, her awakening set into motion the downfall of Azafure. Most blame her unexpected revival on the city’s overzealous mining of Brimstone, while a few blame the city’s pollution, and some fewer cite dubious prophecies. But behind closed doors, there are whisperings that she was revived deliberately as part of a plot by opposing forces.

-Brimstone Elemental was asleep for many years, but then awoke and was a part of Azafure’s destruction.
-There are many theories to her reawakening, from Azafure’s Brimstone mining industry, to pollution, even proclaiming that it was the result of a prophecy. Some secretly believe that someone had reawakened the Brimstone Elemental purposefully for vile reasons.

Overzealous: Overenthusiastic in a matter.
Dubious: Suspicious, not trustworthy.

 Skeletron Prime 

So consumed by hatred were some souls, that they pledged they would do anything in my name.
Their devotion was unerring. Absolute. No atrocity was beyond them; their vengeance knew no bounds.
I organized them into shock troops, dreaded for their flamethrowers and incendiaries.
Leveling places of worship and torching those falsely devout, their expertise lay in unmaking faith with flame.
Draedon understood well. For them he crafted a visage so grim, it evoked oblivion itself.

- Yharim does not see arson as a problem.
- I don’t know what more to say this guy is just Yharim committing war crimes.

 Calamitas Clone 

I had seen this monster roaming the night in the past, and thought nothing of it.
With its technology, it was certainly one of Draedon's creations.
But, to think it was housing a clone of the Witch… Detestable.
Surely Calamitas would want nothing to do with such a project.
I know not how it wields her brimstone magic. Perhaps some day one of us may find answers.

- This entry also doesn’t reveal much…
- Draedon somehow made a clone of Calamitas. It’s unsure how he did it.
- He likely made the project after he left Yharim’s army.


Calamitas Clone
This machine which stalks the night carries the failed clone of the Supreme Witch. Though lacking her hexes and black magic, even a fragment of Calamitas’ brimstone power was enough to drive the clone to insanity. Nothing human remains.

-Calamitas Clone is an outer shell that contains a clone of Supreme Witch, Calamitas. After being given a small portion of Calamitas’ powers, the clone lost any form of humanity it may have had remaining.

 Plantera 

This floral aberration is another example of the volatile power of harnessed souls.
Taking their mastery of agriculture to new heights, the Jungle settlers bred a special sprout.
Through ritual blessing of the soil, it was fed legions of souls.
Elders of the village wished to bring forth a new age of botanical prosperity.
Indeed, the plant was awe inspiring. But it was wild and untamed, with a will of its own.
Now that you have slain it, still more disorderly spiritual energies are flooding the lands.
The village's ignorance was shameful in its own right, but this is worse still.

- Villagers in the Jungle made this, wishing to “bring forth a new age of botanical prosperity”, whatever that may imply.

 The Abyss 

While there are many sightless crevasses in the deep sea, this one is a unique geological marvel.
It is located unsettlingly close to the shoreline. Somehow, even eons of tectonics could not seal or crush it.
The isolated Abyss is the debatably tranquil home of the naiad Anahita and some reclusive sea creatures.
Here, I disposed of the burgeoning remains of Silva, the Goddess of Life itself. Obviously, she of all Gods refused to truly die.
My wishes were that she would be forgotten, but her tenacity is remarkable.
Diffused, her influence inundated that pit of crushing pressure with flora and fauna aplenty.
Her great roots continue to thrash and tear at the impossibly dense stone, growing uncontrollably.
She will soon remake it in her image. I can think of no worse fate for this accursed, hadal domain.

- The Abyss being so close to the shoreline isn’t just a gameplay effect.
- Anahita came from The Abyss.
- The remains of Silva, the Goddess of Life, were thrown into it, but she refused to truly die. This is why stuff like Planty Mush exist.
- Silva will, eventually, “remake it in her image”.

Crevasse: Hole.
Naiad: Mermaid.
Burgeoning: Burning.

 Leviathan and Anahita 

Although she claims dominion over all the world's oceans, in truth she is a recluse of the deep.
Elementals pose a grave threat to all those around them. Other Elementals are no exception.
Anahita was driven from her home in the Abyss by Silva's encroaching greenery.
Accounts vary as to the majestic beast at her side. Some claim Anahita summoned the Leviathan herself.
Regardless of what you believe, they are inseparable even in death.
Such stalwart loyalty! It reminds me of Yharon.
- Anahita is the Water Elemental, and can control the oceans.
- She was kicked out of the Abyss by Silva, who tried to claim it as her own.
- Silva, too, is an Elemental. Her exact title is unknown.
Anahita
Once a resident of the Abyss, she left it long ago due to Silva’s influence spreading through her former home. She wishes to see all overtaken by the ocean, so that her domain may encompass the world. Such is the nature of all elementals.

-Anahita originally came from the Abyss, but left due to Silva’s influence overtaking it.
-All Elementals apparently desire all to be within their domain.
Leviathan
A gargantuan marine reptile that lurks the ocean depths along with the Water Elemental, Anahita. It is unknown if she is the last of her kind, or was simply manifested into existence like her master.

-The origins of the Leviathan are unclear. All that is known is that she lurks in the Ocean with Anahita, anything more is a mystery.
-The wording here implies that Anahita was created out of nothing, which could potentially hint at the origins of the Elementals.

 Astrum Aureus 

Ever pragmatic, Draedon dispatched this machine to locate and analyze the source of the Astral Infection.
While nominally for reconnaissance, the Aureus model is heavily armed and can scale any terrain.
It performed admirably, at least until it was assimilated into the Infection.
Sapient minds have enough willpower to resist the Infection's call indefinitely.
However… even the finest silicon is not beyond its reach. Draedon prefers his creations to serve, after all.
With this experiment concluded, he will certainly be examining you next. Watch yourself.

- Beings with a sapient brain are immune to the Astral Infection. Namely, humans.
- Draedon is coming.
Astrum Aureus
Once meant for returning equipment from and surveying sites of prior battles, this creation of Draedon’s was overtaken by the Astral Infection. Unfortunately, its defeat has released what power it possessed, granting it instead to the star’s other warriors.

-Astrum Aureus was a recon robot created by Draedon for the purpose of exploring old battle sites, but was taken by the Astral Infection.
-Astrum Aureus held great power within it, likely given to it by the Infection.

 Golem 

What a sad, piteous thing. Truly, a mockery in every sense of the word.
The Lihzahrds were abandoned by their deity long ago. They set upon creating the idol as a replacement.
The result is an amalgamation of the concepts and themes of many Gods, prominently the heat of the sun.
It is a far cry from a mechanical god… for the better. The alternative is too chilling to consider.
While I believe this insignificant construct barely deserves mention, the Lihzahrds revere it unflinchingly.
I see no need to intervene in affairs beneath me and my people.

- Yharim really dislikes Golem
- He is also racist towards Lihzahrds.
- They were abandoned by their deity long ago, whoever that may have been (more on this later).
- A mechanical God would be very scary.

 The Plaguebringer Goliath 

An innocent queen, forced to bear an agonizing existence. This is nothing short of a crime against nature.
Without consulting me, Draedon sought to weaponize the already well-organized Jungle bees.
When he revealed his finished project, I was enraged. Enslaving the bees was despicable.
Draedon cared little for my outrage and returned to his other work without further incident.
From that point on, I stopped making requests of Draedon. He had shown me his true colors…
In my later days I was far from virtuous. But I would not shackle a creature to fight in my name.
That would make me no better than the divine scoundrels I pursued.

- The Plaguebringer Project was what made Draedon and Yharim part ways.
- Yharim deeply resents the idea of slavery.
- Yharim REALLY likes bees.

Scoundrel: Villain.
The Plaguebringer Goliath
The Plague’s creation initially began after the unsatisfactory results the soul-power machines provided, with Draedon seeking absolute control. After testing many different variants for decades, both the Plague and its goliath were born, with its spread allowing for an amount of control over life once thought impossible.

-Draedon started creating the Plague after the Mechanical Bosses.
-Several decades after the Mechanical Bosses’ creation, the Plaguebringer Goliath and the Plague were born.

 The Empress of Light 

Though her title is lofty, she is more an emissary for the powers beyond and forces of nature.
In broad daylight, she can channel the Primordial Light itself, making her nigh untouchable.
Thankfully, left with only starlight to wield, she falls like any other graceless despot.
Her penchant for leeching the strength of other great beings is uniquely deplorable.
It made her sickeningly obedient. Dependent, but willingly so as they enabled her to slake her base thirst.
I had deigned to slay her myself for her treachery, but she was a notoriously evasive mark.

- The Empress can channel something called Primordial Light.
- She is an emissary for powers beyond and forces of nature, and is obedient to them.

Despot: Tyrant.
Penchant: Inclination.
Slake: Satisfy a thirst.
Deigned: Did something that one believes to be below themselves..

 Duke Fishron 

Outlandish as they may seem, this species is the single mightiest of the seas.
They are relentless hunters and can easily spend significant time out of the water.
Folklore holds that the Fishrons claim heritage from the true Dragons; countless years back.
While there are many such tales of creatures of draconic descent, this case is factual.
Genetic heritage or not: the Fishrons lack Dragonblood and Auric souls. I would well know.

- Fishrons are descendants of true Dragons.
- They do not have an Auric Soul.


 Ravager 

A sickening flesh golem built for the sole purpose of savage, relentless destruction.
The monstrosity was a desperate bid to turn the tides against my God-seeking armies.
I could scarcely believe it myself, but it was born of a ritual of great sacrifice, performed in ardent faith.
The ritual condemned and fused the bodies and souls of their fallen allies into this hideous thing.
When the warlocks pledged their very lives to it as an offering, it awoke and effortlessly massacred them.
Now caked in fresh blood, it hungered for more, and set off on an aimless rampage.
I suppose its brutality serves as a reminder to be careful what you believe.

- The Ravager was created in a desperate attempt to stop Yharim’s army.
- It failed.
Ravager
The mangled reincarnation of the God of Sacrifices, given life once more. Necromancers sworn to his faith returned his broken body to his temple, offering the only sacrifices they could to reverse his Death– their own lives. Yet, necromancy is an imperfect art, and the god has very little of his mind left, simply destroying all it comes across.

-Ravager is the reincarnation of the God of Sacrifices, and before his revival, consumed the Auric Soul of the Dragon of Death.
-While he may have died, necromancers that were devoted to his faith attempted to bring him back through their own deaths. This was successful to an extent, as necromancy is imperfect.

 Prelude 

In ages past, now named the Draconic Era, the majestic Dragons protected Terraria from all threats.
Their famed might was put to the ultimate test by an aberrant behemoth from beyond the stars.
Fighting with all their strength, the Dragons could wound and weaken it… but not destroy it.
Lacking options, they tore the monster down to a shadow of its former self; sealing it away.
What is left of it now lies imprisoned in the Moon, as far away as the Dragons could banish it.
Much of dragonkind was lost as casualties in that struggle, and they never recovered.
Zeratros himself was gravely injured. It seemed his power, along with his life, would be lost forever.
One mortal, sworn to the service of the Dragons, rose in determination to save their virtuous King.

- A long time ago, dragons protected Terraria. One day, a behemoth from the stars, the Moon Lord, came down and nearly wiped out every Dragon on the planet before being sealed.
- Zeratros was the King of Dragons.
- One mortal was sworn to serve the Dragons, and rose in determination to save Zeratros.

 Astral Infection 

This twisted dreamscape is a starborne equivalent of the mundane rot you see in your lands.
I do not claim to understand the process in detail, but even the stars above can die. 
Left unchecked, their corpses bloat and fester.
Typically, some semblance of order is maintained. It is not unlike the circle of life.
Cosmic beings patrol the fathomless void and pick at the carrion, leaving clean bones.
The infection itself is a disturbance from deep space. It has a mind of its own, and projects its will upon life and land.
Those whose minds can grasp the true form of the universe are largely immune.
They cannot be starstruck by a supposed higher truth, let alone one preached by a pustule.

- Stars can die, somehow.
- Cosmic beings eat the corpses of stars that bloat and fester into the Astral Infection.
- The Astral Infection has a mind of its own.

 Astrum Deus 

On our world, this being is revered as the God of the night sky. It is said to devour dying stars and birth new ones in turn.
Unlike the many Gods you or I know, it is guiltless. An important distinction, for it was equally as diseased as they.
The infection that tainted its body is from beyond Terraria. Neither I nor Draedon recognize it fully.
With its will subsumed, it hurled a chunk of infested astral matter at our world, then came to guard it.
Thankfully, such a grandiose being that walks amongst the stars is likely not truly dead.
While the land has paid a terrible price, the price of a wrongful conviction is higher still.

- The Astrum Deus is revered as a God, devouring dying stars and birthing new ones. However, it is guiltless of the divine crime (more on that later).
- Astrum Deus’ will was subsumed, making it hurl the Astral Meteor into Terraria and then coming to guard it.
- Astrum Deus is not truly dead.
- The God of the night sky is not a true God.
Astrum Deus
When a star begins to die, under normal circumstances, its power simply fades as it falls to the nearest celestial body. However, some dying stars bloat and fester before falling. Astrum Deus exists to consume these stars before the Astral Infection manifests in them, and it has been revered for its sacred duty since time immemorial.

-Astrum Deus serves as a guardian of the stars, and devours dying stars. It is revered due to this.
-The Astral Infection can form within dying stars, and Astrum Deus’ purpose is to consume these stars before the Astral Infection forms.

 Requiem 

As the Light Dragon was fading, the monk visited him. Nearly none understand what transpired that day.
Most say his passing was eased. The truth? Zeratros' Auric soul was consumed; utterly.
The monk stood, wreathed in Primordial Light, declaring themselves Xeroc. The First God.
When a Dragon is laid to rest on the Aerie, its powers are relinquished so they may one day return.
Xeroc renounced their sworn oath and broke the cycle, becoming a traitor without equal.
Word of the ascension spread quickly. Many attempted to follow suit and claim an Auric soul for themselves.
Now you know… Good intentions or no, all Gods are sinners. Each and every one complicit in genocide.
Wherever your journey may lead, whether you are with me or against… May fortune favor you.
For nothing else will.

- The monk consumed the Auric Soul of Zeratros and became Xeroc, the First God.
- They were covered in Primordial Light.
- When a dragon is put to rest, their powers are resigned so one day they may return.
- Xeroc broke the cycle and their oath with dragons, making them a traitor.
- When they ascended to Godhood, the event news spread like wildfire. Many people from across the world rushed to get their hands on an Auric Soul, but regardless of their intentions, they were all complicit in the divine crime of killing a dragon.
- A God is a being that has consumed an Auric Soul, stealing the power of the dragon they killed.

Wreathed: Covered.
Relinquished: Resigned, abdicated.

With this, we have officially entered the Post Moon Lord territory. This is where the items start to become quite lore intense and specially revealing, but nonetheless, I would like to thank you for your time reading this and for your dedication to the Calamity lore. Let 's continue now!

 The Profaned Guardians 

The Guardians are rather simple constructs, extensions of the Profaned Goddess' power.
They are given partial autonomy to hunt down threats and are rarely seen outside of temples sanctified in her name.
She has been attempting to expand her domain, it is of no surprise she sees you as her largest threat.
After all, it was you that finished off the star-spawned horror that catalyzed the downfall of the Dragons.
Draw her out from hiding. Have no mercy, for the Profaned Goddess shows none herself.

- The Profaned Goddess is revered in temples dedicated to worshiping her, and the Guardians protected them.
- Attempting to expand her domain, she sees you, the player, as the biggest threat.
Guardian Commander
In a time lost to memory, there were four soldiers who used their wits and teamwork to slay a dragon, that one might gorge themself upon its auric soul. “I am the wisest,” declared their commander, “I should be the one.” There was silence, until Providence spoke: “You need temper your wisdom with action, that we might impose our will upon this world.”
Guardian Defender
In a time lost to memory, there were four champions who used their loyalty to one another to slay a dragon, that one might gorge themself upon its auric soul. “I am the strongest,” declared their shieldmaiden, “I should be the one.” There was silence, until Providence spoke: “You lack strength of conviction, that you might try to pluck the stars from the sky.”
Guardian Healer
In a time lost to memory, there were four champions who used their fathomless determination to slay a dragon, that one might gorge themself upon its auric soul. “I am the most courageous,” declared their cleric, “I should be the one.” There was silence, until Providence spoke: “Your courage blinds you to the truth, that your overconfidence would doom you.”

-The Profaned Guardians were once human soldiers who helped Providence slay an Auric Dragon.
-This happened very long ago.

 Dragonfolly 

Near the close of the Draconic Era, there are records of the “impure” Dragon species.
Wyverns, basilisks, Pigrons and the like are documented. Though none are sure how exactly they came to be.
To this day, scholars argue over the true names and lineages of these creatures.
Names aside: it is clear the first offshoots are pure enough to retain the great strength of their forebears.
Naturally, this led them to be targeted by cruel divine mandates, and most were hunted to extinction.
It is known that Fishrons, Follies, and the Abyssal Wyrms survived the purging hunts of the Deific Era.
Notably, they now are all reclusive or exceedingly violent. It is tragic how they evolved to be that way.

- Wyverns, Pigrons and Basilisks are possibly related to Dragons.
- There are three known species claimed to be direct descendents of the dragons that are still alive to this day, the Fishrons, the Dragonfollies, and the Abyssal Wyrms.
- The era that comes after the downfall of the dragons is the Deific Era.
Dragonfolly
Long ago, these siblings of the auric dragons hid themselves away in the depths of the jungle. They hunt prey using the immense static electricity generated by the flapping of their wings against their feathery bodies, manifesting as deadly bolts of red lightning.

-Dragonfollies are close relatives of the Auric Dragons.
-They can generate electricity by flapping their wings against their bodies.

 Providence, the Profaned Goddess 

A glorious day.
Deeds of valor of this caliber are enshrined in legend. Of this age, only the Witch, Braelor and myself can compare.
Providence was perhaps one of the wickedest Gods, hellbent on purification through erasure.
Her worshippers saw little value in life. Pain was not a price they felt justified to pay.
The Profaned Goddess promised her followers she would end inequality by reducing all to featureless ash.
Those devoted to her were weak-willed, and yet she reigned as one of the mightiest Gods.
Perhaps it was their easily-swayed nature, that let her draw so much power from them…

- Of this age, only three people compare to what you have accomplished. The Witch Calamitas, Braelor and Yharim.
- Providence seeked to purify the world of inequality by reducing all of it into featureless ash.
- Despite her devoted being so weak-willed, she was still one of the mightiest Gods.
- She could somehow draw power from her followers.

Enshrined: Consecrated.
Providence, the Profaned Goddess
In a time lost to memory, there were four visionaries. With righteous fury, they slew a dragon, and their leader gorged Herself upon its auric soul of Flame. “The world is without guidance, and its people are filled with darkness.” She said. There was silence, until Providence spoke once more. “Let us go forth, and light the world anew.” And it was so.

-Providence consumed the Auric Soul of the Dragon of Flame.
-What darkness could She have been referring to here, I wonder… perhaps it’s just religious symbolism, or perhaps it’s something else entirely.

 Ceaseless Void 

A contained, previously inert portal sealed in the Dungeon. The presiding cult kept it a closely guarded secret.
Upon sighting the Devourer of Gods, their leader hurriedly led me to its chamber to reveal its existence to me.
The portal led to the Devourer's home. It was identical to his, only ancient and perfectly stable.
The serpent claimed: It too was his creation. Its permanence was a mistake he later rectified.
But this rift was unquestionably far older than he. It dated back to the Golden Age of Dragons.
His lie was thin and forced. Something far more powerful than the Devourer was at hand.
Its eerie persistence gnawed at my mind. It did not just threaten me. It threatened everyone. Everything.
Even when faced with blatant lies and harrowing danger, I simply walked away and did not return…

Harrowing: Alarming.


- The Ceaseless Void is a portal to the Devourer’s home, that was kept in sigil by the cult in the Dungeon, who revealed it to Yharim once they saw the cosmic serpent.
- This portal dates back to the Golden Age of Dragons, and DoG blatantly lied it was his construct.
- Something hides in the Distortion. Something that threatens to destroy this very world.
Ceaseless Void
-

- This is not an error in the document or the mod, there is intentionally no bestiary entry.

 Storm Weaver 

This beast, while of lesser stature than the Devourer, is a great danger in its own right.
They are clearly of the same species. Even this serpent was known to devour Wyverns whole.
Very little is known about the realm or space that the Great Devourer hails from.
Even Draedon and his obsessive research has been unable to discern its true nature.
The Weaver slipped through a rift from this place opened by the Devourer, and he has monitored it since.
In his mind, the lesser serpent's similar powers could lead it to be too threatening for him to let live.
Little does he know, he has forever stood in a similar position. He thinks himself invincible after all.

- Draedon studied the Distortion, but couldn’t discern its true nature.
- Yharim believes the Weaver and the Devourer are from the same species and have similar powers.
Storm Weaver
An invasive pest from another dimension crowned by many as king of the skies, soaring across the upper atmosphere at near unmatched speed. Unlike the other beings from the Distortion, the Storm Weaver lacks higher purpose, feasting upon the remnants of the civilization that once dwelled in the skies.

-Storm Weaver comes from the Distortion, similar to the Devourer of Gods and Signus.
-It lacks a higher purpose, probably meaning that it’s disconnected from the Distortion hive mind.

 Signus 

An aberration that defies all explanation, borne of the Distortion and revered by the Onyx Kinsmen.
Almost all information about this entity is sourced from that enigmatic clan. All else is hearsay.
It has been reported to manifest in multiple places at once. Its capacity for deceit and ruthless cunning is peerless.
Statis' compatriot Braelor dueled me to a standstill. With our blades locked, the ronin lunged for the lethal blow.
The Devourer is not one for honor or loyalty. But he sensed weakness. Hesitation. An easy prey.
The serpent ensnared both my assailants in a dimensional vortex. Assuring me they were as good as dead.
Yet, Statis must have struck a bargain with Signus. He escaped his banishment unscathed.

- The Onyx Kinsmen revere Signus, a being spawned from the Distortion.
- Braelor was a compatriot of Statis, who dueled Yharim to a standstill. While their blades were locked, Statis lunged for the lethal blow, but he hesitated, and the Devourer saw an opportunity to attack and lock both in the Distortion.
- Statis is still alive, as he has made a deal with Signus to escape the banishment.

Peerless: Unmatched.
Signus
‘For any desire, there is a price’. A deal bound in Onyx and sealed in blood, and one can have any wish granted– a gateway, a promise, a betrayal. Curiously, there is no recorded history of Signus before the age of gods, and very little recorded to this day. Perhaps, for the right price, one might find out the truth of Signus for oneself.

-”A deal bound in Onyx and sealed in blood” You might call it a blood pact
-Ok in all seriousness, Signus is an incredibly mysterious entity, as no evidence of them existing came from before the Deific Era, and little records as a whole. However, if one were to make a specific bargain, one might figure out what the deal is with Signus.
-Although… why does this entry talk about a “gateway”? Maybe this is referring to how Statis got out of the Distortion? And if so, does the “promise” and “betrayal” also refer to something regarding that deal?

 Polterghast 

The further my war dragged on, the further I sank into negligence. This specter is the crux of my failure.
I hid behind my excuses, calling them duties. Fighting the gods. Training. Ruling.
I had the time and resources to devote. I was simply paralyzed by apathy.
The scores of prisoners I kept in the dungeon I claimed perished alongside their jailors.
Within those hexed walls, none may know rest. Their souls coalesced into a formless monster.
Boiling with rage, wallowing in sorrow, screaming in madness. The amalgamation was uncontrollable.
The dragon cult was furious, their leader demanding I put the haunt down myself.
I did not answer. I had long since become deaf to the world outside my crusade. Do not fall as I have.

- Yharim’s war had dragged on for decades.
- He has kept several prisoners within the dungeon, and alongside their jailors, they all died, forming together into the Polterghast.
- The amalgam marks the separation of Yharim and the dragon cult.

Hexed: Cursed.
Coalesced: Merge.
Wallowing: Drowning.
Polterghast
The feral amalgamation that drove out the cult that once dwelled here, and inadvertently broke an alliance thought to be eternal. Many have delved into the dungeon in search of riches and knowledge long since lost, yet most simply join the spirits that have claimed this place as their own.

-Nice theme namedrop
-Polterghast is an amalgamation of many spirits that drove out the Dragon Cult.
-Many who venture into the Dungeon are slain by this amalgamate, with their spirits joining the many other deceased that wander the Dungeon.

 The Old Duke 

That was possibly one of the oldest mundane living beings on the face of the planet.
The first Fishrons were spotted in the middle of the Draconic Era. What exotic prestige…!
Fishrons were one of the original offshoots of pure-blooded Auric Dragons.
They are so old and venerated that many historians are convinced they are the original sea monsters of folklore.
This particular Duke's guile is self-evident: It evaded centuries of hunting, and until now had survived a most thorough poisoning.
Above almost all others, this creature was a living fable. One must wonder what goes through the mind of a fading legend…

- The Old Duke was one of the oldest living creatures of the world, dating back before even Xeroc rose.
- Fishrons may have even been the source of much of the sea folklore.
The Old Duke
One of the original draconic offshoots who were born in the Draconic Era. Dragons who were born after all the auric souls had been gifted to their kind were forced to make do without, forever outside of the cycle of rebirth. Yet in a twist of fate, the auric dragons’ age would end, and those rejected would be the survivors in this new world.

-The Old Duke is one of the first Draconic offshoots, born long ago in the Draconic Era.
-They managed to outlive the age of the Auric Dragons, being one of the oldest creatures on the face of Terraria.
-There is a limited amount of Auric Souls in the world.

 The Devourer of Gods 

The infamous, otherworldly glutton, in the flesh. His imposing title was self-granted, but truth made it stick.
He is a formidable foe: Capable of swallowing Gods whole, absorbing their essence in its entirety.
I ordered Draedon to armor his gargantuan form, so he could safely best even great Gods in single combat.
Fittingly, he had a serpent's tongue. He manipulated me incessantly, driving me to awful acts.
I recruited him out of desperation. My war had dragged on for decades, and I would do anything to have it end.
It was then my negligence was born. My descent began the moment recruiting this scoundrel crossed my mind.
His absence of loyalty was clear as day, even at the time. However, I suspect it goes beyond that.
The Devourer's alien capabilities and domineering tactics hint that his allegiance lay elsewhere.
Is he but one soldier, a mere pawn of a malevolence far beyond…?

- The Devourer of Gods was known for defeating even powerful Gods in a duel.
- He marked the start of Yharim’s downfall, being a manipulative scoundrel that drove him to commit heinous felonies.
- He was never loyal, for his loyalty lay elsewhere, at the hands of whatever rules the Distortion, even above him.
The Devourer of Gods
An entity of many titles and reputations, it is easy to conflate the truth and myths of its many legendary deeds. Though Yharim once believed that the essence he devours is utterly and completely erased from existence, it is a fundamental rule of creation that energy cannot be destroyed– it can only be transferred from one form to another.

-The Devourer of Gods had exaggerated his capabilities, possibly in an attempt to enter Yharim’s forces.
-By far one of the most important things here is that Godly essence cannot be completely destroyed due to a rule of creation, so where does it go after the Devourer consumes a God?

Conflate: Combine into one.

 Yharon, Resplendent Phoenix 

The return of the Age of Dragons, dashed. Just like that, it is but ashes in the wind…
Yharon was the last of the Auric Dragons. As a phoenix, his domain of power includes rebirth.
The Gods thought him culled with the rest of his kind, but he returned as an egg. Hidden on the Aerie.
I was destined to consume his Auric soul when he hatched, and rule forever as God-King.

Destiny is for the weak.

I rejected their whims, and upended their scheme. I was sentenced to execution for treason.
Their meek, ingratiated swine cast both Yharon's egg and I into the magma of Hell.
The intense heat hideously scarred me, but birthed Yharon anew. He rose, wreathed in fire, and saved my life.
From that day, our souls were one. He shared with me the tale of Zeratros, and the genocide of his kind.
I promised him I would have justice. So the war began, Yharon rallying all as a beacon of hope.
Now, that hope is long withered. I am but a husk of the hero I once was, and this is the ultimate proof.
Yharon may yet return, as he does, but he… he has bade me farewell.

- Yharon is the last of the Auric Dragons, thought to have been killed but being reborn in an egg. Said egg contained Yharon’s Auric Soul, and Yharim was destined to consume it and rule forever as God-King.
- Yharim refused to do so and destroyed their plans, being captured and sentenced to death with the egg. However, Yharon hatched and saved him, sharing the tale of Zeratros. Their souls became one, and Yharim’s crusade against the Gods started.
- Roar of the Jungle Dragon is canon, if you are wondering.

Whims: Plans.
Meek, ingratiated swine: Referring to the God's servants with several insults.
Yharon, Dragon of Rebirth
Each dragon once wielded nigh limitless power over their domain, a fundamental power drawn directly from the world's fragmented soul. The dragons were masters of all; life, death, even the great Primordial Light that banishes the eternal night beyond. And yet, one of these majestic beings reached a height of power possibly second only to their king. He who made his kind eternal through his powers of Rebirth... and yet, even eternity did not last.

-The Auric Dragons held immense power over their respective domains.
-Primordial Light is supposedly the Sun.
-Yharon was likely close in power to Zeratros, and was part of the reason why the Dragons were able to be reborn.
-Something called the “World Soul” was shattered at some point, and the domains of the Auric Dragons have something to do with it.


 The Exo Mechanical Trio 

What a terrifying marvel of engineering. Draedon's specialty always lay in the machines of war, but these are immaculate.
His bold claim that no God can match his work is, however… incorrect. He is not privy to the Traitor almighty.
Regardless, from steel and wit alone, he has forged engines of destruction that rival Calamitas.
It brings me little comfort to remark that even she, at least has a heart to speak of.
Draedon is an amoral monster beyond compare. He is entirely devoid of humanity and compassion.
With technology this incomprehensibly advanced, he stands at the precipice of apotheosis.
He can fabricate such dreadful, synthetic nightmares at will. His resources must be nigh unlimited.
Were he to lose his temper: if he even has one, all of life's hopes would be smothered in an instant, silenced by a torrent of silicon.
Though, perhaps you may leverage his unimaginable craft to your advantage, and seek insight from him.

- Draedon can supposedly unmake all life on Terraria were he to lose his temper.
- He is entirely devoid of compassion and humanity. Amoral, in the very sense of the word.

Wit: Intelligence.
Apotheosis: The absolute peak.
Leverage: Utilize.
XF-09 Ares
The first of the superweapons Draedon created, Ares is capable of both widespread destruction and concentrated attacks with its deadly cannons. His goal in making the Exo Mechs was to forge war machines that could rival even the vaunted strength of Yharim when last they saw one another. To gaze upon this diabolical monstrosity is to know fear.

-Ares was the first Exo Mech that Draedon created.
-Draedon was attempting to make machines that could match Yharim’s strength before they parted ways.

Vaunted: Boasted or praised excessively.
XM-05 Thanatos
A mechanical serpent built using a revised variant of the Devourer’s armor plating, it was intended to be utterly invincible. Even its weakness of needing to vent due to overheating was turned to a strength, for no creature of flesh or metal can survive such temperatures. To gaze upon this serpentine terror is to know true power.

-Thanatos was created after the Devourer of Gods’ armor was crafted.
-The heat produced by Thanatos’ overheating is so extreme that almost nothing can withstand those temperatures.
XS-01 Artemis
The final superweapon to be created, Artemis only needed a single revision to its original blueprints. Draedon’s perfectionist nature allowed him to raise his skill in engineering to new heights, culminating with a machine possessed of unbelievable nimbleness and precision. To gaze upon the archer is to gaze a second too late.

-Artemis was the final Exo Mech that Draedon created, and it required little revision to become finished.
-Draedon’s engineering skill is without equal, and as such he can create machines with incredible speed.
XS-03 Apollo
With plasma cannons that rival the heat of Calamitas’ own flames and trained in advanced simulations against the world’s strongest, few can match this machine of war. Though the chassis consumes incredible amounts of energy, its power demands are easily met by its Exo Prism power core. To gaze upon the oracle is to know its unwavering stare.

-Apollo’s plasma cannons can match Calamitas’ brimstone flames in heat.
-Exo Prisms are a source of immense energy.

 Calamitas 

None have borne the brunt of misfortune quite like the Brimstone Witch, Calamitas.
When first I saw her, she was still a girl. Prostrated in my court, garbed in charred rags as she trembled.
I could not grasp the unfathomable, raw power of the fell magics that coursed through her.
She could scant control it herself. Permafrost recognized this immediately. With a pained face, he counseled me to look after her.
The Witch entered his tutelage, and soon after, my service. She was ablaze with desire to douse the Gods in her wicked wrath.
Indeed, the faithful already quaked in her presence. Her name was a moniker of theirs, one uttered quietly in fear.
In my campaigns, I counted on her sheer capacity for annihilation as my ace in the hole.
No man: army, city or God could stand against her unbridled fury.
Eventually, the girl's horrific sin was too much for her to bear. She left my side along with her mentor.
The weight of her deeds haunts her to this day. She despises me, and I cannot blame her.
Please, if you would… show her respect where I did not.

- Calamitas was just a child when she entered Yharim’s army.
- She was strong enough to destroy Gods, even in her childhood.
- The Witch was Yharim’s trump card, acting when nothing else would.
- Her own sin was too much for her to bear, and she left Yharim’s side with Permafrost.

Borne: Carried.
Prostrated: Bowing down to.
Garbed: Wearing.
Scant: Barely.
Douse: Extinguish.
Moniker: Epithet.
Unbridled: Unstoppable.
Supreme Witch, Calamitas
After inheriting nigh limitless magical power as a mere teenager, she was recruited into Yharim’s army, where she served for nearly a decade. She reveled in the violence of it all, the endless dance of madness and death, allowing the Godseeker to wield her as a weapon in his endless war against the gods. But now that the fire inside her has died, all that remains are the smoldering embers of regret.

-Calamitas had been drafted into Yharim’s army as a teenager, and remained there for nearly a decade.
-In the early years, she took enjoyment from the destruction, but after the war ended, she only felt regret for her actions.

Smoldering: Slowly burning without flame.

 Cynosure 

You now stand at the brink of infinity. The power you have amassed is extraordinary.
Valor and deceit, truth and falsehood, loyalty and betrayal… you are beyond these notions.
You have rent all asunder as they crossed your path. The very land now bends to your will.
Do you not see how the grass parts where you step, how the stars illuminate where you gaze?
Terraria itself kneels to you, whether it be out of fear or respect.
This is the strength the Dragons held. The primordial power they commanded.
Little stands between us now. If you did not seek battle with me, I doubt you would have come so far.
When you are prepared: seek the grave of the Light, at the summit of the Dragon Aerie.
I await your challenge.

- This Lore Item talks more about the player than anything, there isn’t much to cover, but I will still say what little it gives us.
- Your strength is akin to that of the dragons, however, it is unclear whether it’s the source or the level.
- Yharim awaits you at the peak of the Dragon Aerie, where he has been all along.

 Draedon’s Logs and Schematics 

These items are our next critical lore point to explore. While the Lore Items give a major description of the entire world and are without a doubt our most important source currently, the Logs and the Schematics provide more insight into something very important too, that being Draedon’s participation inside Yharim’s army and several other pieces that help tie together a timeline. Without further ado, let’s begin!

Sunken Sea Bio-Center Lab


 Log

"Marine Biology Log"
Page 1
A hub of diverse ocean life, and all that remains of Ilmeris that is unscorched. Once its rural outskirts, it is now the final fragment of a once powerful kingdom. It is fortunate that the Witch only focused on attacking the cities proper, and spared some amount of the sea from the Incineration. I have long yearned to research these waters in great depth, yet was never able due to the ongoing conflict. Although many species went extinct in the devastation, many still thrive down here in its depths. It is in this lab that I may finally study aquatic life properly and learn of their nature.
Page 2
Although the marine life in these caves do have eyes, some of their eyes are weak and process few colors. All they are made to see is the light of the sea prisms that surround them, with many creatures relying on them to guide their way through the submerged caverns. Their tough, gnarled hides possess crystal growths that I had originally assumed were the prisms settling on their backs. However, dissection results reveal that they instead possess these crystals internally, and the growths are a result of internal sea prisms bursting out of their hides. The growth of these crystals reaches such an extent that some creatures are more geological than biological in certain areas.
Page 3
Of the specimens here, the abnormally large clams capture my interest the most. Many times larger than the average person, their weight is so great that they lack the ability to move via the same methods as their smaller counterparts. Instead, they rely on teleportation to transport their hulking, heavily armored bodies. They seem to have once possessed further magical powers according to scouts. However, as they were seen only from afar, their reports could have easily been mistaken. Alternatively, their source of power simply could have faded after Ilmeris’ downfall. It is unwise to entirely discount the latter possibility.
 Schematic

The weaponry I supply to the workers of the laboratories is weak. Hardly suited for battle.
However, they suffice for self defense against any lab mechanisms or creations which may have gone rogue.
Addendum: For those who think themselves powerful, search the upper bounds of this planet's atmosphere for a structure similar to that of the Sunken Seas.
I will know by the end if you are worthy of battling my creations.

- The Draedon Logs at their core serve as worldbuilding more than anything. However, they still give us plenty of information regarding the biomes they are found in and talk about certain events.
- In this particular Log, we discover that Calamitas has scorched Ilmeris down, turning it into a desert, leaving only the Sunken Sea, the rural outskirts of the kingdom, left for Draedon to study.
- Yharim and Ilmeris were also relatively hostile for a good time now, too, as evidenced by the fact that Draedon could never study the sea because of the conflict. This doesn’t necessarily imply that he joined during the war, but at the very least that Ilmeris and Yharim never got along.


Space Bio-Center Lab

 Log
"Low Orbit Study Log"
Page 1
High above even the sky islands upheaved long ago lies a fascinating geological phenomenon. Though, unlike the islands, their airborne nature appears to have formed more naturally. I speculate that they formed long ago when the world was in its infancy judging by soil samples I have taken while testing high atmosphere plant growth. Perhaps these “planetoids”, as many refer to them as, formed via meteor strikes tossing matter high into the atmosphere. This would simultaneously explain many geological oddities I have found on the world’s surface.
Page 2
Travel between worlds is a fascination of mine. The planets within reasonable distance to this provide no use to me in terms of materials or study opportunities they could provide. And so, I wish to go further beyond this mere cluster of planets some day. It will likely take many more decades of technological progress, however, as travel between worlds would take years even at the maximum speed physical matter can currently go. Perhaps I will find a way to shatter this limit once this world holds my interest no longer.
Page 3
A request from Yharim has been delivered. An inquiry to create a suit of armor for the serpent that has joined his forces recently, the “Devourer of Gods” as the serpent calls himself. He is a bothersome yet fascinating being. And so, I have taken the opportunity so that I may learn more of his home dimension. Using materials from his place of origin, I have forged armor of immense size and durability yet extreme flexibility. It is certainly one of the most unique materials I have worked with and has advanced my knowledge greatly. Though, I have learned more than I expected to about the cosmic beast from this. Perhaps more than he wished for me to.
 Schematic
Within an army, as weapons do, the soldiers serve different purposes. That distinction is crucial, as the wrong tool in the wrong hands—no matter how potent—may as well be a wooden club.
Addendum: Seek out my base of operations closest to the Lihzahrd's home. I wish you the best of luck with all sincerity, for it has been a long time since I have had a worthy test subject.
- Once again we get some more worldbuilding, explanation as to what exactly are the Planetoids. We also discover that the Sky Islands we see in the sky are artificial, at least sorta, and yes, fucked worldgen has also been explained.
- Draedon has not set foot beyond Terraria, yet has a fascination for going after so. In a way, his wish was conceded as he got to work within the Distortion and forge the Devourer’s armor. Despite this, his knowledge of the place is severely limited, though he did gain information on the nature of the creatures that live there.


Jungle Bio-Center Lab

 Log

"Plague Nanomachine Log"
Page 1
It would not be a stretch to call the jungle the hub of this planet. All is centered around it, and none know not of it. It brings me no small amount of unease to see the uncomfortable, raw forms of the living beings who pass through on their journeys above. Fortunately, these labs provide everything I need in my research and more. There is little need to visit the surface, save for Yharim’s summons.
Page 2
Few travel down here, with far fewer making the expedition to reach as far down as this research station. As such, I have taken to using this isolation to develop advanced nanotechnology for use in controlling the minds of biologicals. I yearn for it to be capable of spreading from organism to organism, a perfected blend of a virus and nanotechnology. Yet, it has been an arduous task even with my newly developed technologies. Further experimentation and research are required.
Page 3
Continued experiments have led to significant results. With a mechanically modified Queen Bee as a primary host, it may act as the core of a hive mind of those my plague has touched. However, Yharim was outraged upon learning of my experiments here and decried them as inhumane. After a brief verbal conflict, he wordlessly left and I have not heard from him since. Fortunately, I need not rely on the slayer of gods any longer, nor have I needed to for years.
 Schematic
As rank progresses, so often does the lethality of equipment. In the hands of competent soldiers, the weapons have the ability to make change. However, competent soldiers take no action but orders from above.
Addendum: If you read this, you have come far. Do not disappoint. Go now to Hell, for the next component stored in what were once my forges.
- I have previously refrained from talking about this specific subject but the Logs also give us some very interesting inner workings of Yharim’s army, specifically how at the very least their weapon ranking scaled.
- Draedon remarks the fact that he no longer needed Yharim anymore nor has needed for a long time. This could mean several things, however, granted the Godslayer has vast resources, Draedon needs something that would grant him just as many. One may wonder how exactly he has many resources, something even Yharim mentions on the Exo Mechanical Trio Lore Item.
- Needless to say, but yeah, Yharim left Draedon because of the Plague project.
Underworld Bio-Center Lab


 Log

"Environmental Pollution Log"
Page 1
The Underworld is a realm with history dating back more than a millenia when the Crags were first settled, and acts as a glance into both the modern and ancient world simultaneously. Prior to my joining of Yharim’s forces, Azafure was the center of scientific advancement in this world. Explosives, firearms, smithing techniques, and even entire schools of magic have roots in the city. It is doubtless that the city has been largely aided by the fact that forging is trivial in the Underworld, along with an abundance of food due to Silva’s essence dripping down from the Abyss above. Due to this, it has prospered even with the occasional attack from Demons.
Page 2
Azafure has not existed without consequence, of course. Any society on such a large scale leaves an ecological footprint behind. This can be seen most clearly in the sea far above the city, appropriately known as the Sulphurous Sea. Brimstone fumes became intense enough in the city that they began rising up through the Abyss via a process akin to osmosis, and eventually reached the sea. Reducing the pollution the city creates, particularly from forging, is a goal Yharim wishes for me to prioritize. I see little need in it, yet it is a field of study few in this world have delved into. I refuse to squander an opportunity for scientific breakthrough.
Page 3
A particular being here has been the subject of my interest: a massive wall created from biological material lies in this place created many years ago by the greatest mages Azafure has to offer. It is a living being, though only just. It lacks both pain and emotion, and brings terror to all who lay their eyes upon it. It is kept protected via high security by the city, and so few aside from the Godseeker’s closest allies have had the opportunity to observe it. For as long as Azafure continues to stand, it is unlikely to ever be truly released. Yet, I do not deny that I would be fascinated to see the effects its release would have on the world.
 Schematic
Only the highest ranking in the battalions of the Yharim's army held these weapons. However these are still not my most potent tools. Those...characters could not be trusted with them.
Addendum: The final piece remains. Travel now from the hottest fire this land has to offer, to the most frigid cold. I cannot deny having some sense of poetic symmetry.
- Azafure is the reason behind the Sulphurous Sea being so toxic because of the toxins it releases via smithing. Even then, they still receive energy from Silva that drips down from the Abyss.
- Draedon was sent to the Underworld to lessen the ambiental impact Azafure caused in the world.

Tundra Bio-Center Lab


 Log

"Cryonic Material Log"
Page 1
A freezing tundra, where only creatures entirely adapted to the subzero temperatures exist and thrive. Few sapient beings have ever permanently resided here, save for miners and the Archmage. With this fact in mind, Yharim has requested I observe this place for oddities due to the armies largely having glossed over this location. Additionally, I have been requested by the Archmage to perform studies on his frigid metals. There is little else to do in this frozen wasteland, and so his request has been accepted.
Page 2
Cryonic Ore, as the Archmage simply calls it, is a material seemingly akin to iced over glass. One would assume it is a fragile material at a glance, yet upon testing it is clear that is not the case. Plating made out of it has been found to be more durable and resilient than mythril alloy via flexural and tensile testing, followed by destruction attempts. Yet, it is but a fraction of the weight. Perhaps mass amounts of this material could be used to forge armor for units who disdain for the usual burden of metal plating. I will likely inquire further about the creation methods of Cryonic Ore to achieve this.
Page 3
As described earlier, Cryonic Ore was developed by the Archmage, Permafrost. Despite his position as the mage of mages, he has little will to engage in combat. He instead acts as advisor to Yharim, assisting in much of the management of cities and towns taken by or sided with the Godkiller. In addition, he seems to have bonded with the girl who arrived seeking Yharim some months ago, acting as a fatherly figure to her. I myself have taken an interest in her immense natural power.
 Schematic
I have since made progress to even greater weapons than these, but they remain creations to be proud of. No progress can be made without a desire that comes from dissatisfaction.
Addendum: The time has come. You are ready.

- Cryonic Ore has been made by Permafrost, who too has taken care of Calamitas in her initial days in Yharim’s army. Draedon was surprised by the durability and use of this Ore.
- He too remarks that the Tundra is likely not natural, however can come to no conclusion as to how it was exactly made.
- Again, more confirmation as to the Archmage function within the army and confirmation that he is without a doubt very strong on his own, but prefers to not engage in combat. Same for Calamitas, confirmation as to her joining and relationship to Permafrost.



 Draedon Communication 

Logs and schematics aren’t the only ways to get access to Draedon’s perspective, though. Communication with Draedon via the Codebreaker provides numerous insights into many aspects of the lore, from characters to specific dates in the timeline. The first part of his dialogue is simply a fetch quest for a piece of Exo technology to prove the player’s worth, so we’re skipping over it straight to the relevant parts.

 Inquiry: Your Origins 
My first memories are that of awakening in a distant laboratory on the date of 11.19.1227, well over six centuries ago. Surrounded by nothing but a vast taiga, I was accompanied by only one other thing: a dead organic.
- Draedon was created “well over six centuries ago”, on 11.19.1227, placing the events of the game some significant amount of time after 11.19.1827.

Presumably, I was created by what I assume to be the laboratory’s former inhabitant, though I am unsure how they accomplished such a feat. From what I gathered, they were quite the prestigious inventor, not unlike I. Several gadgets assumedly of their own making were attached to their body, and the equipment in the lab was more advanced than any I found elsewhere in the world.
- Draedon’s creator, an inventor based in the taiga, had technology far surpassing anything in the world.
- Draedon could be an AI, but the cybernetics attached to his creator’s body suggests he was a botched consciousness transfer. Alternatively, the transfer may have been successful, if his creator wished to wipe all of their memories.

I have no recollection of events prior to my activation, but from the start, I knew what my goal was: creation and scientific advancement. Many years were spent optimizing and building upon both the laboratory and myself to assure constant progress.
- Draedon expanded his laboratory for a while, so it’s definitely not one of the Bio-Center Labs.

At the date of 7.30.1385, expansion of the laboratory became impractical. Thus, I chose to instead expand my horizons. I sent hundreds of remotely-piloted scoutbots to thoroughly survey the continent, ignorant of the attention such an endeavor would draw when not properly prepared.
- Not much to be gleaned here, save for more raw data to pin down a timeline.

In the following years, legends and rumors began to spread in nearby cities. Many spoke of encounters with roaming creatures made not of flesh and blood, but steel and oil. Scholars attempted to study my machines. Some explorers even followed my creations back to one of my several recon bodies.
- Draedon’s machines used to be a common sight.

However, as the years passed, I became adept at carrying out such operations in a subtler manner. Slowly but surely, stories about my machines became rare. By the year 1421, my creations and I became nothing more than myth until the Crusade began.
- Draedon is now skilled at operating unseen, with knowledge of his machines dropping into legend in 1421.

 Inquiry: Role in the Crusade 
While the Crusade is widely considered to have begun on the date of 6.19.1781 with Yharon's rebirth, I took no part in it until 4.23.1803. Upon joining, I was chosen to lead the science and engineering divisions. While I was given freedom over which projects I chose and how I pursued them, it was expected that anything I made would be beneficial to the war effort.
- The Crusade began on 6.19.1781. Draedon joined around twenty years later, on 4.23.1803.

Boosting the efficiency of mining operations was my first major contribution to Yharim's campaign, being essential to any further development. I learned how to mass produce the first generation of Excavators to expand mining operations outside of Azafure, and then used similar mass-producible technology to create arms and armaments that far outclassed our enemies'. Many simply dubbed this equipment "The Arsenal".
- Draedon first helped with expanding mining operations, meaning Yharim was no longer dependent on Azafure for materials.
- “The Arsenal” is, in fact, the canon name people used for Draedon’s weaponry.

Throughout the Crusade, I also created widespread surveillance systems, using knowledge gained from my original survey of the continent I was activated on. Soon, my vigil over Yharim's rapidly expanding territory was absolute, and my knowledge of his adversaries grew. There were few nations I knew not the weakness of, and fewer still that knew our own.
- Draedon also acted as a spymaster, a role he was perfectly suited for.

However, what I am most notorious for are my hulking machines of war. I am certain that you are familiar with them. Though Yharim was almost sycophantic in his praise of my results, even if he sometimes questioned my methods, our time together came to an abrupt end after he learned of the Plaguebringer Goliath. Regrettably, this event left a sizable hole in my laboratory. No longer subject to his restrictions, my work on cloning the Witch and creating exotechnology began.
- Draedon’s final interaction with Yharim as his engineer was not, in fact, “verbal”.

My role in the Crusade summarily ended; I do not consider the later inclusion of exotechnology into Yharim’s armor a formal part of my work under him. Yharim's knights and other troops continued to use my "Arsenal" in their military efforts, but I no longer oversaw their research or production.
- Yharim’s armor has integrated Exo technology.

The Crusade did not obstruct or interfere with my core objective of creation and scientific advancement; rather, it simply redirected my focus. Through it, I gained novel insights and reached heights I would not have reached without playing a part in it. I appreciate having had the opportunity to work with some of the greatest organic minds of the time, and I hope those that are still alive will bring progress to a plethora of fields I have yet to explore.

 Inquiry: Your Goals 
My goal has been and always will be the advancement of science and technology. I will continue until I am eliminated or I reach the universe's scientific ceiling. Even if I have shattered limits before, there is bound to be a point at which nothing more can be done to advance. I find it unlikely I will ever reach this point.

You may have intended to ask of more specific long-term objectives. I currently aim to observe the world with a far more open mind than I once had, so that I may find further inspiration for new works. Even long after my activation and after meticulously surveying large portions of Terraria, there is much that I still do not comprehend.
- Draedon is currently focusing on understanding the nature of Terraria.

Once I have a firm grasp of the vast majority of this world's workings, I will focus my study on the Astral Infection's effects in hopes of finding a way to negate them permanently. When present on a planet, one simply could use a Clentaminator and the correct solution to remove the Astral Infection. In the vacuum of space, however, it makes for an irksome and tenacious obstacle. Ventures beyond Terraria would require preparation and appropriate countermeasures.
- Afterwards, Draedon hopes to find a way to eliminate the Astral Infection, in preparation for later space travel.

In contrast, I will present a short-term goal: I wish to begin harvesting minerals from this world's moon. With the husk of the cosmic titan culled, I plan to begin experiments with wireless spatial linkage. The teleporters you are familiar with must be wired and are thus unsuitable for interplanetary distances. Scalable logistical means for instantaneous transport will be paramount in harvesting and ferrying materials beyond Terraria when this world becomes unsuitable for my needs. To be clear, I do not wish to see this world devastated and have no intentions of ruining it.
- In the short term, Draedon is researching wireless teleportation and preparing for lunar mining operations.

 Inquiry: The Exo Mechanical Trio 
The zenith of my craft. The culmination of all I have ever accomplished. The result of over six hundred sixty years of research and scientific advancement. They are my magnum opus; a work of art. Simply calling them war machines would be an insult not just to me, but to them.
- Here’s an important line. Draedon goes into more detail on how long it has been since he was activated, placing the events of the game some time in the range of 11.19.1887-11.19.1897.

Ares was the first to begin construction. Its early models, XF-00 through XF-05, were developed primarily to find the most efficient combination of weapons for it to wield. While some were more deadly in and of themselves, particularly those featuring projected hard-light melee peripherals in place of its laser and plasma cannons, it was clear that they did not synergize well with their brethren. Its current arms maximize its threat level when deployed alongside them.
- Ares was the first Exo Mech, and was initially designed with hard-light swords. These were scrapped, as Draedon believes the current configuration is best for group efforts with the other Exo Mechs.

The second to be drafted was Thanatos. I took advantage of the size of the chassis and potent propulsion systems to add nigh impenetrable armor and innumerable pulsed laser turrets. Few would be capable of learning its weakness before meeting their demise.

I forged its armor using a process inspired by how Silva created Braelor's axe: by using particle jets to slowly and carefully fuse many elements together into a nanocomposite, the invincible armor organically "grows" over Thanatos' structure like a chrysalis. Regrettably, the plating's immense weight makes Thanatos notably slower than its siblings.
- Thanatos was second, with armor “grown” over its chassis.
- Braelor’s axe was created with a similar process, likely involving the fusion of multiple materials.

When designing the third, Apollo, my goal was to downscale significantly; to make something powerful, yet compact. Reviewing the most compact forms of destructive potential I knew, I elected to simulate the Witch's flames.
                	 
Apollo's searing exoplasma is fueled by unstable nanomachines that constantly shed a deluge of ultra high energy particles. This both heats the plasma to incredible temperatures and causes radiation burns of a severity on par with those inflicted by the Witch. The craft had little capability beyond its nanomachine plasma projector, but there was no worry. Apollo was never meant to fight alone.
- Apollo was inspired by Calamitas, and its plasma is on par with brimstone flames.

The final to begin construction was Artemis. Rather than being founded on raw power, it was made to be the apex of speed and accuracy. There is elegance in simplicity, for all of Artemis' combat efficacy comes from an onboard predictive AI and a battery of hard-light bolt emitters.

It was the perfect partner to its twin and required just a single revision. Organic beings are naturally inclined to fixate their senses on fire, presenting Artemis with the perfect opportunity to strike with unparalleled precision.
- Artemis and Apollo were specifically designed to counter organics that allow themselves to focus on fire.

 Inquiry: What is Exotech? 
Exotechnology is my greatest scientific advancement, unlocking a new echelon of potential in my machinery. The iteration you are most familiar with, the Exo Prisms, took a great deal of time to perfect. My focused efforts on this power source have been met with immense reward, one that has yet to be fully realized.

The basis of exotechnology stems from my own neural interface, which serves as a synthetic replacement for the brain cells of organic life. Exotechnology is predicated on a modular implementation of this synthetic intelligence, which enables communication and interfacing with any conceivable form of technology. Instructions and information are processed at lightspeed in a distributed fashion, not unlike a cerebral network taken to its theoretical extreme.
- Exo technology is based on Draedon’s brain, allowing it to interface with any technology at incredible speeds.

Peerless computation density does not come without a price. My prototype models consumed absurd amounts of energy and could not be meaningfully integrated into any system without a limitless source of power. After experimentation with a plethora of different candidates failed to bring results, I chose to approach the problem of limitless power more directly.
- Unfortunately, said neural interfaces consume a lot of power.

The Ilmeran crystals that you know as "Sea Prisms" are self-illuminating and provide a weak electric charge indefinitely, even when tapped by circuitry. Etching the crystals with conduction pathways at the molecular level and providing an initial energy impulse, not unlike igniting a newborn star, transforms them into a facsimile of the Exo Prisms you are familiar with.
- Sea Prisms are theoretically infinite energy sources, though very weak. Precise modifications can drastically increase their production, creating Exo Prisms.

Exo Prisms emit a self-sustaining resonance of particles that is unlike any other phenomena I have observed. I dubbed this Exotic Resonance, and it is the breakthrough that the rest of exotechnology is named for. Exotic resonance remains present no matter how much energy is drawn from it, amplifying the intrinsic properties of the Sea Prisms far beyond my expectations. The sheer abundance of energy produced via exotic resonance allows a sufficient quantity of Exo Prisms to power any device, no matter the size or complexity.

You will find my modern Exo Prisms easy to work with when using my forge, and should have no issues using their power to vastly enhance your armaments. If you are concerned about my harvesting of Sea Prisms from Ilmeris, do remember that you found the largest ever cohesive gem unharmed in my laboratory. Artificially growing equivalent crystals allows me to manufacture pure, flawless Exo Prisms en masse, which provide much more stable power output. I have no need to strip mine the sea kingdom to meet my exponentially rising energy budget.
- Draedon is capable of artificially growing Sea Prisms, eliminating the need for mining operations.

 Inquiry: Miracle Matter 
Is that really what you have chosen to name it? How nonsensical. There is nothing miraculous about what you hold in your hands; it is the culmination of decades of research and a testament to the truly unlimited potential of science. Though, as you were the one to be able to stabilize it, I will begrudgingly refer to it as that.

The particles contained within Exotic Resonance are capable of breaking down nearby matter when exposed to enough external energy. You have already experienced this phenomenon whilst fighting against my machines. The power surges from the ongoing battle caused some of the Exo Prisms within to actuate, melting down some of the internal components into an unstable slurry of this so-called Miracle Matter. The altered resonance enhanced their attacks with a prismatic blight that disintegrates anything, organic or otherwise.
- Exotic Resonance can deconstruct matter, creating Miracle Matter.
- The Exo Mechs’ utilization of Exotic Resonance in their attacks was not intended by Draedon.

The various materials that you exposed to the exotic particles melded together in such a perfect way to create a stable substance. Harnessing the combined force of draconic wrath, the life essence of the planet, energies and spirits alike, and the strength of the cosmos, what you now possess has limitless potential.
- Draedon was unable to stabilize Miracle Matter, the Terrarian was first to do so.

Hypothetically, your stabilized Miracle Matter should be able to unmake some of your weaponry and reshape their essence into something infinitely more destructive, capable of annihilating any obstacle in your path.
- Crafting with Miracle Matter involves deconstructing the composite weaponry and reconstituting it into something greater.

 Inquiry: Your Forge 
I mentioned the first time we communicated through your "Code Breaker" that I had other reasons for giving you the blueprints for this forge. Notably, I wish for you and Yharim to be on even footing when you inevitably clash. There are three primary reasons for this.

Firstly, I wish to witness such a battle. Secondly, you are far too valuable for me to allow you to throw away your life in combat with the Godseeker. Thirdly and most importantly, I am interested in how society as a whole would react to the Godseeker's defeat. Such a scenario is not easily replicable, nor do I expect another appropriate challenger to rise before his natural passing.
- The Terrarian is valuable to Draedon in some way.
- Draedon is interested in society, something we haven’t really seen of him before.

Providing access to my forge is how I am assisting you in reaching the heights of power Yharim possesses. Though you are surely aware of how to utilize it by now, you may benefit from understanding the minutiae of its inner workings.

The forge's core mechanisms operate upon both the raw energy output and connective properties of Exo Prisms. The exoparticles physically dissociate a multitude of other potent crafting stations, letting them all exist and function simultaneously in the same enclosure. From there, the embedded exotechnology allows them to work collectively as one workshop, providing a single interface for the entire forge. The blueprints for the exterior structure are embedded in the prisms. You need only provide the requisite materials.
- Draedon’s forge is literally multiple crafting stations in one, with a unified interface.

Once fully constructed, the Exotic Resonance field containing the superimposed workstations is controlled by a computation matrix which comes preinstalled with all my data on the fundamental building blocks of our universe. Using the universal compatibility of exotechnology, my forge can interface with and disassemble any kind of matter you present to it, and output any desired result.
- The forge functions via a computer containing all of Draedon’s material data.

 Inquiry: Yharim 
The Godseeker. He once fascinated me nearly as much as you now do, both of you being unpredictable catalysts of a new era. I first heard word of him and the Crusade via scoutbot reports twenty-two years after the crusades began. While the rumors about Yharim himself and his war plans to conquer a city on the continent I was on intrigued me, another rumor demanded my full attention. Supposedly, he was accompanied by the Auric dragon that was the catalyst for the Auric dragons' rebirth.
- 22

I saw this as an opportunity that could not be missed. I modified a scoutbot to enable two-way communication and dispatched it to the city that was supposedly Yharim's target. I had expected it to arrive while the city was still under siege to have an edge in negotiations, but by the time my machine arrived, the city had fallen a week prior. Such military might was beyond anything I had deemed possible at the time. It was then the Godseeker interested me just as much as the Auric dragon did.
- Yharim’s military power surprised even Draedon.

Yharim was a very distinctive figure even then and it was not difficult to locate him. I found him in a charred street directing the cleanup effort. After he spotted my reconnaissance drone unexpectedly, we had a tense but brief negotiation. I discovered he had a passion for military history, as he quickly deduced that I was the source of the mysterious beings of steel and oil from centuries past. Despite the initial tension, I found him receptive to my offers after his realization. Perhaps he viewed me akin to a mythical force of nature not allied with the gods.
- Yharim tends, or at least tended, to take such menial tasks as cleanup efforts into his own hands.
- Yharim, unsurprisingly, is knowledgeable on military history.

I explained our mutual situations from my perspective. I desired to create and progress, but was limited by a lack of safety. Yharim commanded a formidable army, but his great ambition could not be fulfilled unless he had an edge over his adversaries that could not be matched.

My proposal was a simple one. I would join his forces and focus my research onto assets that would benefit his campaign. In return, Yharim would see to my protection and provide me ample resources to pursue my work. The Godseeker was initially skeptical, but accepted after I showed him various examples of my technology. I was soon moved to the heart of Yharim's empire and made his lead engineer and scientist. While we had many disagreements that would eventually result in us parting ways, we came to a vague understanding.
- Draedon joined Yharim both due to research aims and a need for protection.

Though I was disappointed that I had little chance to study Yharon given he was what initially drew me to Yharim, I would be presented with many other opportunities throughout the next seventy-two years: the Archmage's magic, the Devourer's realm, and the Witch's power were the most notable. The Crusade taught me that I progressed faster with external aid, even if it only served as inspiration.
- Draedon was largely unable to study Yharon.
- Draedon was removed from Yharim’s service some time around 4.23.1875.

My last interaction with Yharim was not even a year before I first observed you. He had come to me some months after his nearly fatal encounter with Braelor and Statis and requested that I enhance his Auric armor with my newly-invented exotechnology. We spoke little before he departed to the Dragon Aerie, and I believe him to still be there.
- Yharim’s armor was upgraded less than a year before the start of the game, and Braelor and Statis made their fateful assassination attempt only a few months before that.

 Inquiry: Dragon Aerie 
My knowledge of the Dragon Aerie is limited. Yharim is adamant in protecting it. In recent history, only he and Yharon have trod there, and neither were inclined to share details about it.
- No one other than Yharim and Yharon have been to the Aerie in recent times.

Even if I dared to evoke Yharim's wrath, I cannot survey the Aerie. My attempts at locating it have been fruitless despite having surveyed this world's surface and skies many times over. Perhaps it avoids observation, as per some manner of cloaking. It is also possible it simply exists outside of conventional space, in a pocket dimension of sorts. Either case would make detecting it via my current methods drastically more difficult.
- Draedon has been unable to detect the Aerie, leading him to hypothesize it is either cloaked or located outside of space, such as in a pocket dimension.

What I do know is that the Dragon Aerie is an unusually large sky island that acted as the sacred home of the Auric dragons. Few others were ever allowed to tread there, as a sort of religious sanctuary or holy ground.
        	 
It is also where Auric dragons would be laid to rest in preparation for their revival by Yharon. As their revival on the Aerie was a commonly accepted fact even at the start of recorded history, the sky island must be at least 2,000 years old, with Yharon himself being a similar age.
- Recorded history dates back around 2,000 years.

Considering the extraordinary power of the Auric dragons and the sanctity of the Dragon Aerie, I am left to ponder: did the Aerie make the Auric dragons powerful, or is the Aerie inundated with power due to their extended presence? Perhaps more importantly, what made them leave the safety of the Aerie even as their kind were being slain? I eagerly await the uncovering of such mysteries.
- Draedon presents two questions; did the Aerie’s power or the Dragons’ power come first, and why did they leave it during the draconic purges?

 Inquiry: The Brimstone Witch 
The Witch was an unexpected ally in the final stages of the Crusade. For most of the campaign, I was undoubtedly Yharim's greatest asset, but that changed when she arrived. Her flames burned hotter than my most powerful furnace, and her desire to torch the Godseeker's enemies surpassed even my passion for creation.

The Archmage was firmly opposed to her fighting, though Yharim would often send her on covert missions while Permafrost attended to other matters. Between these excursions, however, he attempted to act as a guardian and teach the young Witch how to control her magic. These sessions were the most perplexing and simultaneously the most fascinating portions to observe.
- Most of Calamitas’ missions were in secret, to avoid Permafrost’s outrage.

Calamitas was shown to only have a slightly above average grasp on the principles of magic, being unable to cast complex spells without them overloading and bursting into flame. Yet when wielding the brimstone fires of the underworld, she commanded power that rivaled Yharim's. My surveillance over Azafure never signaled anyone who lived there having such power, and a mere child certainly could not hide it. Furthermore, she was no goddess, or Yharim would have slain her at any cost.
- Calamitas’ magical skill is only marginally better than average, except in the field of Brimstone magic, where she excels beyond belief.
- Despite this, Draedon never detected her power before her arrival.

I therefore hypothesized that she was not born with this power. After combing the archives for records of similar magics, I eventually traced it back to the Brimstone Elemental herself. The arcane signatures were nigh identical, with a few key differences.
- Calamitas likely gained her power from the Brimstone Elemental in some way, possibly causing her to wake. Otherwise, she may have gained it during their confrontation.

After the Incineration, however, my research came to an abrupt and unplanned end. The Archmage had already chosen to desert Yharim, and Calamitas followed in his footsteps shortly thereafter. It was then I would get my final official order from Yharim: replicate the Witch's power. My focus at the time was the Plague, so initially I made minimal progress. Soon after, the Godseeker and I went our separate ways.

Some years later, even without Yharim to order me, I returned to the project in an attempt to create a flame that burned hot enough for an early prototype of my forge. In order to directly replicate her power, I began work on making a clone of the witch made from traces of her DNA I had gathered over the years. Though the clone was a technical success, it showed no signs of being able to wield Calamitas' signature magic.
- It appears Yharim was the one who ordered the creation of the Calamitas clone. Though this may seem contrary to his own statements, Yharim only requested a replication of her power, and the clone was created after Draedon was dismissed.
- The clone could not wield Calamitas’ power innately.

While this did prove that the Witch's power was not natural, I had no means of tracking its source. Soon after the project's underwhelming conclusion, security reports indicated that Calamitas herself broke into the laboratory that the clone was stored in and released it. Interestingly, it became capable of wielding a tiny fraction of her very own brimstone magic soon after. To this day, I ponder the implications of these events.
- Calamitas freed her clone herself.
- Calamitas’ power is transferable.


 Inquiry: The Devourer of Gods 
No being I have seen is as enigmatic as the Nameless Serpent. Nothing in our world even vaguely resembled his body structure, genome, or phylogenetic tree. I began many studies on his nature, all of which quickly failed for lack of a familiar aspect to make comparisons to. Even his basic biological functions proved to be near-incomprehensible.
- Not unexpectedly, the Devourer of Gods’ biology is entirely different from any creature found in our dimension.

It did not help that many of his claims about himself were unfounded. Creating such a stable portal like the one in the Dungeon is a particularly absurd example, as none of his portals have ever been so stable even with my aid.
- The Devourer lies through his teeth, as usual.

Some number of years after the Serpent joined Yharim's forces, an even more confusing addition to the equation was detected: the other, smaller serpent that you refer to as the Storm Weaver. You may have heard the claim that it is of the same species as the Devourer. Any level of in-depth inspection reveals that to be false.

Setting aside the similar body shape, basic x-rays proved that their endoskeletons were entirely different, and the difference in size tells all else needed. In fact, from what little I have grasped about both Serpents' biology, the Storm Weaver may have been older than the Devourer despite the sheer difference in power and size. However, I am not confident enough in this conjecture to state it as fact.
 - Storm Weaver is a different species than the Devourer, and may be older than him too.

Despite my issues with the Serpent, his assistance on the battlefield and with resource acquisition was welcome. One of the few unquestionable truths about him was the grandeur of his title. I still make use of smelted Cosmilite to this day in numerous applications, and I utilize the raw material as a metallurgical component of various alloys such as the Exo Mechanical Trio's plating.
- Cosmilite is a component in Exo plating.

Yet the most profound mystery remains: the means via which the Devourer's body processed or disposed of godly essence. The energy is not absorbed or entirely converted, but scans for traces of the essence showed that it was not stored inside him for other purposes. All signs indicated that godly essence simply vanished shortly after he consumed it.

Unless he blatantly defied the laws of thermodynamics, which is most unlikely, the mass-energy must have been transferred elsewhere. Where to, I am not sure. I doubt this matter will ever be resolved now that the Devourer has been culled.
- The Devourer of Gods does not absorb, convert, or destroy godly energy. Whatever he does with it, it likely involves sending it somewhere else.


 Inquiry: Distortion 
Despite my efforts to gain information from the Devourer when forging his armor, I know very little about the Distortion. What knowledge I do possess was still seemingly deemed to be too much by the serpent. He was fiercely suspicious of my questioning, yet did not interfere with my own limited attempts to probe the dimension myself.
- Draedon doesn’t know much about the Distortion.
- The Devourer is very protective of information about the Distortion, but does not directly stop attempts to research it.

All inorganic material in the Distortion is extraordinarily old, with radiometric dating failing on all 116 samples collected. Given the formations that are present, it is a safe assumption that most matter in the Distortion has existed for far longer than life on this world.
- The Distortion is positively ancient.

Despite most of the local life forms displaying behavior similar to highly intelligent creatures on our own planet, electroscopy and dissection of the few collected specimens revealed that none of them possess neural structures of a caliber needed for independent sapience. This evidence, along with observations of similar behavioral patterns between different species, leads me to theorize that the bulk of the creatures of the Distortion merely express intelligence because they serve as limbs of a central hive mind.

Quite how this is the case is not clear to me. It should not be possible to remotely grant thought capacity to an otherwise simplistic organism. Doubly so when one considers this effect applies to an unknowable number of creatures, all expressing intelligence simultaneously and working in concert with each other to some undisclosed goal.
- Most Distortion life is highly intelligent, but possess either no brains, or extremely underdeveloped brains.

- This leads Draedon to surmise that the Distortion is a hive mind, though the mechanics of this mind are clearly supernatural in nature.

 Inquiry: The Mechanical Trio 
The "Mechanical Trio", as most call them, are what you annoyingly refer to as The Destroyer, Retinazer & Spazmatism, and, though it pains me to call it this, "Skeletron Prime". While you may be an exceptional individual, I question your naming capabilities. For your information, their formal designations are HM-03, HSx-00, HSy-01, and HF-04 respectively.
- The Terrarian is awful at naming things.
- The Destroyer’s designation is HM-03, Retinazer and Spazmatism are HSx-00 and HSy-01, and Skeletron Prime is HF-04.

They were a rudimentary but potent start to my experimentation with engines of war. In search of inspiration, I turned to study the gods and their purportedly unmatched might. While each deity wielded a unique worldly aspect, all drew their strength from an identical source: the soul of an Auric dragon.
- The mechanical bosses were initially based on Gods.

As acquiring an Auric soul was and still is infeasible, experiments with more mundane souls soon began. I was initially discouraged upon discovering that individual souls held a paltry amount of spiritual power, but their potential when coalesced far surpassed my predictions.

Upon further research, I confirmed that a soul's strength is defined by its intense emotions or resolve. Here, Yharim's unrivaled charisma and skill at evoking passion within the hearts of others was key. Not only was finding a source of emblazoned souls trivial, but many of his most stalwart troops even directly consented to having their souls embedded in my machines after their demise at the hands of the enemy.
- Souls gain strength with determination and intense emotions, making the zealous soldiers of Yharim’s army the perfect source.

Fueled by the loyalty of the Godseeker's fallen soldiers, my machines were fearsome and ruthless. Harnessing the meshed combat experience of a thousand lifetimes, their battlefield prowess was self-evident. However, this same source of strength proved to be a flaw, as the unified will that gave them their might also made them volatile and not subject to my commands. While Yharim thoroughly approved, I sought to remove this imperfection from my designs via future projects.
- As we already knew, the Mechanical bosses kept their free will, a matter Yharim and Draedon had differing opinions on.

 Inquiry: The Plague 
Before you ask: I am aware that my nanomachines currently plague the jungle. I created a failsafe in case this happened, and have no intent of causing uncontrollable mass destruction. If it begins to threaten biodiversity or otherwise encroach upon my learning of Terraria, I will deactivate it myself.
- Draedon is keeping a close eye on the plague, and it has a kill switch he can use at any time.

My research into applied nanotechnology began as a means to match the ever rising heights of power organic beings such as the Witch, Braelor, Statis, and Yharim himself were achieving. Living things cannot be externally ordered or controlled, and are prone to fits of emotion and, in rare cases, rebellion.
- Draedon began development of the plague in order to counter organic beings with incredible power.

I aimed to create a weapon which could control, subdue, or eliminate any organic entity, given enough time. I was well aware of the tenacity and adaptability of life, and quickly realized such a weapon would itself need to be alive to overpower and dominate any known organism.

It was through my observation of the growth of such powerful beings, however, that I had an epiphany: there was no need for my machinery to surpass organic life. Not when that very same life could be improved upon and then harnessed as a tool or weapon.

I saw then the banality of my efforts to simply control and replace life. I stood before the near limitless possibilities of enhancing it further.

Even when I deemed that I had plateaued in the field of cybernetics, the limitations of my methodology were ever present. The bodies of most jungle creatures were too frail to handle the prerequisite cybernetic enhancements. A Queen Bee was the optimal choice to host the nanomachines. Born to rule, such beings are resilient enough to survive the augmentation, but still weak enough to be subdued if or when necessary.

Something about this research in particular incensed the Godseeker. Upon witnessing my progress, he flew into a rage. He blasted out a sizable chunk of the genomic laboratory and intentionally allowed my first, unfinished specimen to escape. In no uncertain words, he terminated his agreement with me and stormed off. I do not know what line was crossed, but he has made no further moves to antagonize me, so I shall continue my research in peace.
- Once again, Draedon’s confrontation with Yharim was not verbal as he claimed in the Plague Nanomachine Log.
- Draedon has no idea why Yharim was enraged with the Plaguebringer specifically.

Regardless. There is a unique allure to setting loose a synthesized mimicry of prokaryotic life. It continues to evolve incomprehensibly rapidly, even as we speak, providing endless opportunities for analysis.


 Inquiry: Astral Infection 
The Infection has beguiled me since its surge upon this world. To study it, I retrofitted an Aureus reconnaissance model with armor intended to nullify its effects. In the end, all the protection I could muster only delayed Aureus' fall to the starborne rot. Observing your trials, I understood why it was overtaken: the lack of a thinking brain.

Attempts at studying it on my own failed; a body was built for the task, but the chassis fell short, even if my mind remained. Using an alternative approach, I sent hired mercenaries into the infection. Few returned, but those who did provided me with enough intel.
- It appears a remote controlled body will be overtaken by the infection the same as a body without a thinking mind.

What interested me the most were the reports of an infected Astrum Deus patrolling the Infection. Until the rot afflicted it fully, the closest it had ever been spotted was in Terraria's higher atmosphere. Further analysis pointed towards it being the catalyst for the infection's arrival on the surface. Though I have not found a concrete reason as to why and how this happened, I do have a hypothesis.

As you may know, stars are concentrations of magic that form over countless years of ambient mana gathering together in deep space. With the mana having nothing to gravitate towards but itself, it condenses until it becomes a brilliant star. Stars that grow too large begin to collapse, degenerating and forming clots of Astral Infection. Throughout the cosmos at large, this is a rare occurrence, as Astrum Deus intermittently devours large stars for sustenance.
- Stars form via mana coalescing together under its own gravity in a similar manner to gases condensing into real life stars.

However, space is unfathomably large. If Astrum Deus were to vanish from space for even a brief time, some number of stars should visibly degenerate into Astral Infection, observable via telescope. Yet such observations show no significant increase in the quantity of collapsed stars. Furthermore, I know from my calculations that the observable universe is far, far too large to support a scenario where Astrum Deus disappears.

It is therefore almost certain the Astrum Deus we know is simply one of many. Anything further I say on this matter is speculation.
- Astrum Deus is definitely one of a species, as otherwise the amount of Astral Infection would have vastly increased during the period of its infection.

The infected Astrum Deus near our world may be a juvenile. This would explain why it could struggle to devour a star or fail to identify an infected star as a potential hazard. It then grew sick and crashed onto the nearest planet. As there are presumably many others of its kind, space on the whole is largely unaffected. I welcome any other hypotheses you may have.
- Draedon theorizes that the Deus that was infected may be young, though he admits this is conjecture.

 Inquiry: Sulphurous Sea 
Even before I used the sea as a disposal site for nuclear waste, it was never a pleasant place for your kind. Sulphuric fumes from Azafure's industry rose through the Abyss and came to pollute the sea far above. Most of the calm, docile life that once flourished here was utterly demolished by such a hostile change.

The new life that emerged many years later via mutation and other adaptation allowed for studying how life can adjust to such harsh conditions, including ever-increasing levels of radiation. Though I did not value such data at first, familiarizing myself with the increased tolerances of adapted organic beings proved to be essential at several points during my development of the Plague.
- Research into organic adaptation gained from the Sulphurous Sea was a key point when Draedon created the plague.

If you are concerned about the sea's current state, you are far from the first. You may put your worries to rest, as I have no plans to further irradiate the area for the foreseeable future. Indeed, my actions have already been met with scathing criticism and uproar.
- Draedon has ceased dumping waste into the sea, and has no plans to restart in the future.

The Godseeker's bureaucrats would frequently remind me of how the public had organized to revolt against my advancement of science. From what they knew, they were justified. They feared what calamities further science could wreak upon Terraria, due to the destruction brought upon the Sulphurous Sea.
- People are pretty environmentally conscious, even for the Sulphurous Sea. Protests against nuclear waste dumps in the sea were common during Draedon’s time serving Yharim.

I thought such retaliation to be absurd, but it appears not all can see reason. Despite my infamy and legacy, technological advancements continue to be made by many other scientists across Terraria, even if the subject continues to provoke unfounded fear mongering.

Regardless, if I deem it necessary, I possess the means to simply rebuild the Sulphur Sea from the bedrock up. Restoring it to its pristine status would be a trivial matter and a testament to science's creative potential.
- Draedon can literally just destroy the sea and rebuild it. It would be a “trivial matter”. He can just do that.


 Boss Rush 

Boss Rush is an endgame event where the player fights strengthened versions of all the past bosses. In this event, we see the voice of Xeroc, a very important figure in the lore. All the messages in the event are of their perspective, giving us more insight on several instances that haven’t been elaborated on before.

Xeroc’s Dialogue

First off, we have the dialogue shown to the player upon starting the event. Subsequent refights of Boss Rush have a significantly shorter line of text, one with nothing of importance in it, so it is excluded.

...How long has it been? Centuries? Perhaps even a millennia?
I sank this artifact of mine to the deepest depths of the world to prevent it from being used ever again.
Few are aware of its existence, and those who are?
They know that the boundless power it was once able to provide can no longer be taken advantage of.
It is a surprise to see there is another who is courageous enough to have retrieved it, particularly given these circumstances.
A mortal this time, no less! How interesting...
What exactly is it that made you go out of your way to claim what is now nothing more than a decaying stone tablet?
...Perhaps this is an opportunity. Claiming this relic is no small feat, and I have caught brief glimpses of your journey.
You, who claimed this artifact that ended an era on your quest to end another...
I wish to test your strength, using fragments of my Primordial Light taking the form of your past foes.
It will be no easy task, yet should you prove yourself strong enough, I will have a proposal for you.
Do you believe yourself capable of conquering such a challenge?

-Xeroc is very, very old.
-From this, we can confirm that Terminus was in fact an artifact owned by Xeroc, and that it was capable of providing immense power in the past. This is no longer the case, however.
-A mortal obtaining the Terminus is surprising to Xeroc, evidently. As mentioned before, Silva seems to be incapable of dying, so perhaps Xeroc is referring to her here.
-The Terminus had apparently “ended an era”. This could be referring to the Draconic Era, as that was the era in which Xeroc had ascended.
-The bosses in Boss Rush are formed of Primordial Light, and are not the actual boss.


There are also some lines of dialogue if the player defeats specific bosses before starting the Boss Rush. There are 3 in particular, for a few of the endgame bosses.

Who slew the nameless serpent... 
-This one appears if the Devourer of Gods was defeated prior to Boss Rush. Evidently Xeroc knows about the Devourer; could be significant about something bigger, or could just be the Devourer being hard to miss.

Who bested even my old friend, the Phoenix…
-This one appears if Yharon was defeated prior to Boss Rush. Yharon and Xeroc apparently were friends in the past.

Whose power may match the only mortal who has ever made me doubt my own…
-This one appears if both the Exo Mechs and Supreme Witch, Calamitas were defeated prior to Boss Rush. Apparently Yharim was strong enough to make even Xeroc doubt their own power, which is concerning, to say the least.


Of course, there are also messages for completing each tier of the Boss Rush, not just the start and end.

A passable display so far, but not nearly enough to meet my expectations.
Prepare both your body and soul for what has yet to come.

I wasn't mistaken. You are indeed an admirable warrior.
Still, you haven't shown me enough. Shall we escalate things further?

Your determination and will to grow stronger... It reminds me of myself, when I was mortal.
But the hardest challenges still await. Do not let your guard down, even for a moment.

The trial will soon reach its climax.
Now is the time to display your conviction, and the true extent of your strength and will.
Prove to me that you are capable of surpassing even yourself.

-These four are respectively the messages for finishing tiers 1, 2, 3, and 4.
-I can never tell if these are subtle lore drops or just really cool sounding


And finally, the ending monologue for when you complete Boss Rush.

A truly excellent display. I see that I was correct! You indeed may be this world's mightiest warrior. However…
It seems as though even that power... it is not enough. I'm afraid I will not be sharing my proposal with you.
Though, as a consolation prize, I wish for you to take this ancient stone I carved from the Aerie.
I have long held it as a... keepsake, of sorts.
Though you may have failed to meet my requirements, it is unlikely that this will be the only time our paths cross!
Continue to seek greater strength, and when we meet again, perhaps you will have grown enough in power to be worthy.
In the meantime, I have my own matters that I must attend to.
Farewell, for now.

-We don’t actually get to know what the proposal was, in the end.
-The Rock was supposedly special to Xeroc, for them to keep it this long.
-This is not the last we’ll see of Xeroc.

 Rock 

As stupid as it sounds, the Rock actually has some very important lore in its tooltip, with a very cryptic question at the end.

When the battle was finally over, the dust having just began to settle
Where even the stone refused the course of time, there sat a monk
Who dared to question history and stare into fate
'What is the true price of the past being ever eternal?
Why must our future forever haunt us?'

-Long ago, there was a great battle. This was very likely the battle with the Moon Lord during the Draconic Era, given the context.
-The monk mentioned is likely Xeroc.
-What could that question at the end mean?





 NPC Dialogue 

Calamity adds five NPCs, specifically. All of them come with dialogue too, as expected, and some share information pertaining to the lore. Not only that, but some Vanilla NPCs also have added dialogue that is extra important. Here, I have separated every dialogue that I found important. Please, do note that Cirrus falls under dedicated content and thus is considered non-canon.

 The Sea King, Amidias 

The Sea King is the previous ruler of Ilmeris, the kingdom Calamitas burned during Yharim’s crusade, as evidenced by this quote of his…

"My home may have been destroyed and my people lost... But I will assist you to honor their memory."

Going for his quotes, however, many of the specially relevant entries come from his Help dialogue.

"Scattered across the lands are shrines dedicated to the gods. They contain powerful gear that may help you on your adventures."

The Shrines you find around the world are all dedicated to Gods. We will cover them later, too.

"I assume you have heard of the legendary ninja, Statis? He and his clan worshiped the God of slime, who may be a survivor of the war due to its trickery and knowing when to hide or flee."

Statis was a legendary ninja and his clan worshiped the Slime God. While this has been stated previously, I will talk about facts before if they happen to be stated by more than one character, to show more definitive proof as to some stuff that may or may not be 100% true.

"The [Corruption / Crimson] is a relatively recent development in the world, and its formation marked the start of Yharim's treacherous war. Although the source of its growth would be sealed away, nothing was ever done about the original manifestations.

The Crimson and the Corruption could mark one of two things. Either they were the first slain Gods by Yharim or they were the start of people actually questioning his ways. What we do know is that it stopped growing, at least until you release the essence trapped within the Wall of Flesh.

"Have you ever heard of the Archmage, Permafrost? Once an advisor to Yharim, he one day vanished and Calamitas abandoned Yharim's cause soon after. From what I know, Permafrost was akin to a father to her. Perhaps if she had something to do with his disappearance, he may yet live...?" 

Again, we see some more Permafrost and Calamitas relationship insight. We do too know that Calamitas most likely has something to do with his disappearance other than Yharim. I am going to consider this fact from now on, too.

"Azafure, the city founded in the Brimstone Crags, was one of the first places to support Yharim in his war. Now, it is nothing more than ruins... Just what happened there?"

The actual reason for Azafure burning doesn’t seem to be public.

"The men at the front of the dungeon are performing a ritual to keep the Moon Lord contained in his prison. In order to gain Yharim's attention, however, you may need to defeat them."

This confirms what the Cultists were doing, and also the reasoning as to your fight with them. A necessary evil, it seems.

"The Profaned Guardians serve Providence, one of the few Gods even I despise. The Guardians attempt to eliminate threats to their Goddess preemptively, and it is likely that their next target is you."

"Providence can likely be drawn out for combat by using the relic her Guardians left behind. I wonder... Why has Yharim not challenged her? Is he simply that negligent now?"

"Providence was a great threat to Yharim and his army. She would appear out of seemingly thin air, wreck havoc, and vanish before much damage could be done to her. Perhaps she would be overconfident in facing but a single warrior."

I grouped these three quotes because they all paint a wider picture for Providence and her behavior overall. How she fought Yharim’s army, how her Guardians work, and poses a great question… Why has Yharim not killed her yet?

"The Rune of Kos holds a significant portion of Providence's brand of magic, easily distinguishable from all others. Activating it in certain places would have some... risky consequences."

Take this quote with a grain of salt, I believe it is mostly outdated by now, however, it does confirm that the Rune somewhat holds Providence’s godly essence.

"The Devourer's armor was specially made by Draedon. Extremely flexible yet durable and massive, it may be one of his most impressive creations. I shudder to think of what unholy things he may be able to create now, if his research has not stopped."

It’s quite unfortunate that we find that out. Anyways, once again, more Devourer and Draedon action. It seems like the armor’s nature is quite well known, too.

"The Devourer of Gods is truly an enigma. Some say it's not even from this world at all. What is known is that he is a being that can devour the essence of Gods entirely, leaving absolutely nothing left. It's no wonder Yharim recruited that monster."

One must wonder where said essence goes. It’s either absorbed and turns the Devourer stronger, or perhaps it’s something more sinister.

"Auric is near impossible to work with without being attuned to a Dragon or using the claimed soul of a Dragon to perform a "mock" attunement. However, if one can work with it truly powerful things can be created; enough so that using it in anything was deemed heretical by the Gods."

Oh yeah and here comes one of the single most important pieces of lore from the entire story, hidden in the annals of Amidias help dialogue. This specifically talks about the process of working with Auric Ore and implies a LOT of stuff. I will quickly list it, too.
- Yharim is almost certainly attuned to Yharon, and this allows him to perfectly work with Auric. Quickly citing it, if you die from Auric Rejection, your death message will say you were not worthy, so in short words, Yharim is worthy of Auric because he attuned with Yharon.
- You cannot work with Auric Ore properly, the mock attunement you make by using the mere fragments of Yharon’s soul is still significantly weaker than Yharim’s version of it.
- Gods most likely could not work with Auric Ore to its fullest. After all, why would they deem something they would use heretical? If anything, they would say using Auric Ore was a blessing only they are allowed to have. Plus, it wouldn’t make sense if they could use it, otherwise the power scale of them wouldn’t be all over the place (Slime God and Providence).
 The Bandit 

Enigmatic, they don’t offer much to us in terms of overall lore. However, The Bandit still has quite the fun dialogue, I recommend you read them whenever you have a chance.

"I'd rather not be here. This place has bad vibes, y'know? It brings back some unpleasant memories."

Whatever could this means, ties The Bandit to the Jungle slightly. Could give us some insight as to future plans with them.

 The Archmage, Permafrost 

Much is known about him from the previous several entries, so I don’t think I need to explain this one. Let 's continue.

"The tundra’s unnatural state is not all my doing. Decades ago, I came across it and amplified the climate with my magic."

This paints the picture for two things. One, we discover what exactly made the Tundra so cold, and second, we get to see a glimpse at Permafrost’s scope of power, being able to change a biome with his magic. Granted, that most likely took a long time and a lot of effort.

"Nightfall is a good time for practicing magic. We mages often rely on celestial bodies and their fragments to enhance our mana."

This, paired with some extra knowledge, namely the Fallen Stars being crafted into Mana Crystals and the various magic items crafted from the Astral Infection, without a doubt connects magic to the stars. To what extent, it is unknown.

"If your blood were to thoroughly freeze, it would be quite fatal."

Thanks for the advice.

 Supreme Witch, Calamitas 

The Witch herself. While her NPC doesn’t have much dialogue, her boss quotes reveal interesting things about her character and her motivations to fight you. If you ask about Draedon, his boss dialogue isn’t very interesting to warrant a section in the Document in my opinion.

"Do you enjoy going through hell?" 
“You should have just died..." 
"It wasn't too long ago you barely managed to defeat my doppelganger. Quite the failure, wasn't it?" 
"You've harnessed great power, but you wield it for no one but yourself." 
"Would you like to meet my family? Horrible, isn't it?"
"You will suffer greatly." 
"It's absurd to even think of trying to get away. As long as you live, you will suffer." 
"An upstart who recklessly stole and killed their way to power. I wonder, who does that remind me of...?" 
"You have no stake in this battle. No one gave you any say in this matter!"
"Once the dust has settled and only one remains, if it is you, what value will this have had?!" 

"Just stop!"
"I have no future if I lose here."
"Once you have bested me, you will only have one path forward."
"And that path... also has no future."
"Even if he has thrown all else away, his power remains."
"I have no more energy left to resent him, or you..."
"It will all be in your hands now."

- Her rematch dialogue doesn’t show much of anything interesting, but these few lines are already important enough on their own. First of all, this gives confirmation that Catastrophe and Cataclysm are her brothers. Calamitas was also aware of her clone, which begs the question why she hasn’t destroyed it already, however, it is possible that she discovered it after you killed it. She, too, has her reasons for fighting you, having been so traumatized by Yharim, she sees you as someone as dangerous as him, and being so deathly afraid of the Godslayer, she sets out to kill you herself.




Boss Despawn Messages

As absurd as this may sound, yes, there is lore hidden inside the fucking Boss Checklist unique Boss Despawn messages. Of course, not all of them are epic, but some of them reveal some interesting aspects about certain bosses, but there won’t be many. I will be brief about these, too.


 The Slime God 

“The grimy, gelatinous God hops away, its vengeance achieved.”

- This implies a few things. As much as this “vengeance” could be interpreted as for the slimes, it could too be interpreted as a reason for the God to have even been born. A man seeking revenge in something absorbed an Auric Soul… Simply food for thought, but still an intriguing entry regardless.

 The Brimstone Elemental 

“The elemental ever maintains her somber vigil over Azafure…”

- I chose this entry for a specific reason… Why would the Brimstone Elemental vigil over Azafure, when it destroyed the city in her wake? Something doesn’t line up, perhaps the Elemental wants something different other than destruction, but it isn’t very clear.

 Yharon, Dragon of Rebirth 

“Yharon soars out of sight, his task fulfilled.”

- This is our last entry on this short list. I chose this one because it reveals that Yharon did in fact come to murder us. Combined with the Roar of the Jungle Dragon lyrics, which are now canon, and his Lore Item, we can now safely conclude that Yharon came on his own behalf to try and stop the playable character, with no outside influence coming from Yharim.





 Wulfrum Items 

Items most of the time are a good way of understanding more specific parts of the lore, the world and some characters. As of currently, there aren’t many items that add special tidbits that give us these insights, however, I decided to group what we currently have here! Starting with everyone’s favorite items, Wulfrum!

 Abandoned Wulfrum Helmet
This rather flimsy armor was commonly worn by scavengers and looters.
Its versatility and common nature led it to be used as currency in trades.

- This specific item shows us about the purpose Wulfrum had in the grand scheme. Of course, something so weak and crude as this metal wouldn’t be used if not by the less fortunate, and thus, it was mainly used as a currency.

 Wulfrum Prosthesis
Technology and magic have been forever locked in an arms race of imitation and retaliation.
At times they work in tandem, as seen in certain prosthetic limbs.

- As for this prosthesis, this is probably one of the more interesting descriptions, to be honest. It puts in evidence the co-existence of magic and technology, how they always tried to one up each other and how sometimes they can work together. I believe this is better shown in Draedon and Calamitas, and later Yharim.



 Ilmeris Weaponry 

A kingdom isn’t a kingdom without its weaponry, and you end up coming across it in the game using the Sea Remains. Of course, they also come with their own lore relevancy in their texts, being definitely more interesting and definitely building a lot more on how Ilmeris existed.

 Coral Spout
Knowledge is important, and the Old Sea Kingdom's many scribes knew it had to be preserved at any cost.
Their libraries were much larger than most, because of the water-proof stone tablets occupying them.

- Quite self explanatory. This shows two very interesting facts, one being how Ilmeris actually stored knowledge and the second being the fact that they had quite a vast array of knowledge under their hands. It most likely completely burned though, just like a certain library I know…

 Cnidarian 
From looking at their less sapient brethren, the Old Kingdom's inhabitants adapted tools and weapons designed for underwater efficiency.
The electric properties of ghost bells remain useful even after death, having been commonly used as conduits.

-The citizens of Ilmeris made tools and weapons adapted from their less intelligent brethren. We also get some insight as to how Ilmerians used their surroundings, and we see more about this in some Bestiary entries later in this doc.

 Fishbone Boomerang

Though the evaporating Sea Kingdom fought a losing battle, its proud inhabitants did not go down easily.
As a last resort, they had to fashion weapons from the skeletons of dead animals.

- This one sheds light on a critical detail, Ilmeris’ evaporation was not instant. Calamitas took a while to burn the entire sea down, and Ilmeris still fought to the bitter end.
 Redtide Spear
The people of the sea were adept hunters, but they abhorred unnecessary violence.
Unfortunately, neighboring nations were brutish, so they fashioned their tools for war.

- Well, with this comes a theory. Redtide Spear details that the Ilmerians were highly against unnecessary violence, and that their neighboring nations were quite aggressive. What kick-starts my theory is that as we can see Amidias too is rather pacific, and being against Yharim, I draw the conclusion that perhaps Ilmeris served under a God that preached about peace or whatnot. Of course, take this with a grain of salt, I could be very wrong here.

 Reed Blowgun
The Old Sea Kingdom never truly sought to expand beyond its initial borders.
However, they had a perfect track record of repelling any invasions, thanks to their insurmountable advantage in the water.

- Again, this item remarks the general pacifism of Ilmeris and their biggest strength, that being their absolutely massive advantage in the water. If they did hold a God in its walls, then said vantage should have been big enough for even Yharim to fear, which surely is scary.

 Exhumed Items 

For the current last items we have in store, there are the Exhumed Items. Granted they aren’t very special, they still definitely imply some interesting things about Calamitas as a character and without a doubt help paint a picture of her better as a person.

 Rancor

Forgiveness can only heal so much,
If the recipient has not yet forgiven themselves.

- Very straightforward. Despite being forgiven by you, Amidias and perhaps many more, Calamitas can’t bring herself to forgive her own sins, be it killing thousands, trapping her father figure for years, and who knows what else…
 Cinders of Lament

The Witch, a sinner of her own making,
Within her mind her demon lies, ever patient, until the end of time.

- Once more, more Calamitas trauma. Currently it’s not known exactly what Catastrophe and Cataclysm are for her, but if they are all still brothers, then it definitely checks up, after all, the dead can never be truly revived.

 Gruesome Eminence

The spirits of the amalgam could never pass on to their desired afterlife,
Tainted and melded by rage as they were.

- The Polterghast never truly passed on, it seems, and this item makes it very clear. Such hateful souls, and when powered by a grieving witch, one can only imagine the abomination that would spawn from it.

 Metastasis

A contemplated possible future of the cosmic serpent,
A gruesome warning for those blinded by the hunger for power.

- No, the Devourer of Gods will not become directly The Sepulcher. I swear to God the damage this tooltip did to the world is irreparable. Anyways, this tooltip works more as a metaphor because of how power hungry the Devourer is, and in a way says how, if he did not stop, or in our case, killed, eventually he would just be another mindless beast running around, or perhaps a part of the crawling tomb of Calamitas.


 Environmental Tidbits 

Not all lore is told through text. In fact, environmental storytelling is just as important as any lore Item you may find. However, the environmental storytelling of Calamity as of currently is sparse, since it demands way more effort than just writing text. Of course, I could have missed some, especially when later updates come, but this section will document various structures and enemies that silently tell a tale within the world of Calamity.

Phantasm Dragon


- Summoned during the Lunatic Cultist boss fight, this servant has been directly integrated into Calamity’s own lore. The Draconic Cult worshiped Dragons, and thus, their leader could very well summon one… Or at least, something that looked like one.

The Surface Shrine


- This Shrine specifically is the most concrete we have, by far. With its japanese theming and the presence of Pink Gel, we can safely assume that this is dedicated to the Slime God. Not only that, it is also maintained by Statis, who has been confirmed to be alive. Perhaps you can find him praying to his God, eventually…?

Tundra Shrine

- The Tundra Shrine is rather unique. What I mean is that it has our third God. Yes, this Shrine is dedicated to the God of Electricity, who was worshiped in the Tundra for their benevolence and allowing the inhabitants to live off affordable prices for their heating services. Yharim has then defeated the God, which was reduced to the small jellyfish you see in the bowl.
- Of course, this is a joke. In reality I have no idea what this Shrine could be dedicated to, probably it was just a mundane house, and said person lived with a Rimehound as a pet. But hey, at least I hope I made you chuckle a bit with my “theory”.

Marble Cave Shrine


- The Marble Cave Shrine is an enigma, to be certain. However, I have my own personal theory as to what it could be dedicated to. The Marble Caves are known for the Hoplites, skeletons in armor worthy of gladiators, and the Locket inside the chest also shows that. My theory is that the Marble Caves were used as fighting grounds, and challengers ventured deep into the caves for a chance to fight with glory and pride, and in case they won, be gifted by a God, which I can presume would be the God of Battles, or something similar. Of course, such a figure would eventually be taken down by Yharim, and the competitions would cease.

Granite Cave Shrine


- The Granite Cave Shrine is another one I have an interesting theory about. With Geodes inside and its rather natural shape unlike the other Shrines, I assume this is the opposite of several Shrines dedicated to a God or thing, but rather something a God directly made to aid the mortals, namely what I believe to be the “God of Riches”, or something similar. This God would have made this Shrine to help anyone who came across it, with not only plenty of riches but also a powerful accessory and potions to help adventurers scavenge deeper into the underground in search of greater fortune. 

Mushroom Cave Shrine


- The Mushroom Cave Shrine isn’t too special either. From the contents it has not much can be concluded, but the inclusion of the Truffle Worms could mean that this Shrine was dedicated to Fishrons, as it is likely their favorite food, with the exception of a particularly old individual. Of course, in the Deific Era this sounds unlikely, but remember the cult of the dungeon exists, it’s not impossible that people go around worshiping the Dragons and its descendants.

Crimson and Corruption Shrines


- Both Shrines basically tell the same story, in the same way the Lore Items are very similar in what they tell. While it is weird that someone would worship these putrid mires, it is not far to say that people would still worship the Gods that once lived and turned into the biomes. What I believe is that as Yharim’s war dragged out and people got desperate to stop the Godslayer, they turned to the ones he had already slain. The Shrines are perhaps a way of communicating with them, or perhaps even to aid the Gods in reviving. The intent is unsure, but it definitely feels and looks like a desperate act, especially the Crimson Shrine.

Desert Shrine


- This Shrine has an interesting implication. The desert, at least this part, did not exist before the incineration of Ilmeris. This means it's recent, and most likely not offered to any Gods. It could perhaps be as simple as a tribute to the kingdom, as if someone was mourning the loss of it.

The Abyss Shrine


- This Shrine is shrouded in mystery, just like The Abyss itself and especially the Eidolon Wyrms which seem so closely related to the Terminus. More details on this are present within the Primordial Wyrm’s Bestiary entry, but in case you don’t want to scroll down slightly, let’s review the details here. The Terminus present within the Abyss Shrine is an artifact that is related to Xeroc in some way, as it’s referred to as “their artifact” in the Primordial Wyrm’s Bestiary entry, as well as Xeroc themself claiming ownership of it in Boss Rush. More specifically, Xeroc is likely the creator of the Terminus, and the Primordial Wyrm is intended to be a guardian of this artifact, likely defending it from Xeroc. As for what the artifact was intended to do, perhaps it was a method to contact Xeroc, as Boss Rush contains their commentary as you progress, with their sigil even in the background during the event. I don’t believe we have a concrete answer as to what purpose it serves, or why it’s down here, so I can only speculate with what we have currently.

Abyss Chest Unlock Message


- Self explanatory, but yeah, this is a cool one. Simply saying, this means that the vines Silva implanted in the Abyss have a will of their own, and recognize your feats.


 The Bestiary 

Here is where a bulk of the current lore resides, through the eyes of an unbiased narrator. The same general rules as the Lore Items apply here too. So you don’t have to scroll all the way back up, here’s a quick refresher. Bestiary entries will be recited in their entirety with notes and definitions for certain words below. Any grammatical errors are in fact intentional, unless confirmed otherwise. Certain notes may have some colored lines when talking about specific characters such as Yharim, so do note that. For the entries themselves, they will be separated into 3 different categories, being:
Important entries
Semi-important entries
Minor worldbuilding entries
Something to keep in mind is that certain entries are excluded from this list, due to how they are attached to dedicated content, which is non-canon. These entries are:
Drunk Princess
Fearless Goldfish Warrior
Piggy
With all this in mind, let’s jump right into the Bestiary!

Important Entries
Archmage
One of the world’s foremost experts on magical theory, he is renowned for his skill with the arcane arts. In his days when he traveled with Yharim’s entourage, he acted as the Godseeker’s advisor, due to both his status and his distaste for actively participating in battle.

-Permafrost, the Archmage, is one of the greatest mages in Terraria.
-He traveled with Yharim as his advisor and hated fighting.
Bohldohr
Bohldohrs were made to serve the lihzahrds, being crafted from ancient stone and brought to life with magical power in the twilight of the great Lihzahrd Dynasty. But the sun sets on every civilization, and once their deity abandoned them, they were left to fend for themselves.

-The Lihzahrds had some sort of civilization, even being so advanced as to have a labeled Dynasty. Bohldohrs were created by the Lihzahrds with the intention of being servants, but when the Lihzahrdian deity left them, their civilization was forced to survive on their own.
-The Golem is an attempt at recreating the Lihzahrdian deity, albeit a mechanical one.
Brimstone Witch
Recruited to Yharim’s forces late into the war, her magic overflows with such power that she is largely incapable of casting normal spells. Yet despite her great power, Calamitas prefers not to use it, as it takes a heavy toll on her psyche.

-Calamitas is capable of great strength, but using it is largely harmful to her mental state.
-Calamitas was drafted into Yharim’s war later.
Cataclysm 
The eldest of the three siblings, this brother was a brawler of great renown in Azafure, with few in the city being capable of matching his raw strength. He was protective of his sister, vowing to always be there for her in her times of need. The brother continues to fulfill this promise, even in death.

-Cataclysm is now dead, but was revived through necromancy.
-Cataclsym is the eldest of his siblings.
Catastrophe
The middle child of the three siblings was a skilled swordsman in life, taking up mercenary work to put food on the table. Despite his rather bloody career choice, he did his best to be kind to his sister and keep her out of any danger his occupation could have put his remaining family in. He continues to defend her, even in death.

-Catastrophe is now dead, but was brought back through necromancy, albeit not completely.
-Catastrophe is the middle child in his family, with Calamitas being younger and Cataclysm being older.

Cosmic Mine
Tearing a rift into our world from the distortion takes vast amounts of energy; that is, unless you are a being of both worlds. Signus alone can create these portals with such ease, but even it cannot sustain them for long before the energy used to open them violently disperses.

-Signus is able to create portals to the Distortion, but they cannot keep them active for long.
-This begs the question of how Ceaseless Void is able to stay active for this long, as it is a portal to the Distortion itself. Could there be something else other than Signus that can create these portals?

Eidolist
Once members of the dragon cult, they now beg the favor of a new master. They are able to live in the abyss indefinitely thanks to their wyrm-like form, allowing them to serve a new purpose.

-Eidolists were former members of the Dragon Cult, but at some point, they defected and started serving the Eidolon Wyrms, or very likely the Primordial Wyrm itself.
Eidolon Wyrm
Relatives of the auric dragons, they adapted to hide away in a forgotten corner of the world to survive the great purges. And yet even without auric souls, the power of eidolon wyrms rivals many of their brethren who possessed them.

-The Eidolon Wyrms are relatives of the Auric Dragons, and survived the Draconic genocide by hiding in the Abyss.
-They are able to match the power levels of Dragons, even though they don’t have Auric Souls themselves.
Perennial Slime
These slimes have seized a small amount of the Goddess of Life’s essence. Despite her reimprisonment in the deepest depths of the Abyss, the tendrils of her influence now stretch far into the world beyond.

-Silva was imprisoned in the Abyss more than once.
-She is the Goddess of Life.
Phantom Spirit
The spirits within the Dungeon only vaguely recall their lives, and yet there is one thing each and all clearly remember, that drives them to chaos: the man responsible for locking them in these cursed walls, and his overwhelming power– power that they have been reminded of, due to one ever growing in strength roaming their halls.

-Despite their untimely deaths, the Phantom Spirits still vividly remember Yharim locking them in the Dungeon and growing rapidly in power.
-This entry talks about how the Terrarian is growing close to Yharim in terms of power, and may eventually match him in strength.
Plaguebringer
Nothing can escape the Plague; everything is either assimilated or culled. Such is the case of queen bees. While strong enough to stave off plagued creatures, they are often forced to abandon their hives due to their subjects becoming infected. This leaves their larvae to be overtaken by nanites, and soon after, a plaguebringer is born.

-Plaguebringers are Plague-infected Queen Bee larvae.
-Queen Bees are strong enough to fight Plague-infected creatures, but they often leave their hives due to their subjects being infected.
Primordial Wyrm
The first Wyrm, blessed by the Goddess of Life, held staggering power that surpassed nearly all of its auric brethren. It held a deep hatred for any sign of usurped light, and would have attempted to strike down even the wielder of Primordial Light had they returned to reclaim their artifact. And yet, despite its immense power, it never would have stood a chance.

-The Primordial Wyrm was the first of its kind, and it was blessed by Silva.
-It hates Primordial Light, and if Xeroc had returned to the Abyss to reclaim the Terminus, it would have attempted to kill Xeroc. Despite this, Xeroc’s strength is far greater than the Primordial Wyrm’s ever will be.
Sea King
The seventeenth ruler of the constitutional monarchy of Ilmeris since the tribes of the Ilmeran Sea unified, under the Electric Goddess, Otonilou, and the elusive God of the Seas. Alas, one cannot be a ruler without subjects, and while he remains widely respected by those who opposed Godseeker Yharim, his kingdom is no more.

-Unironically an incredibly important entry. You wouldn’t expect that from an NPC, would you?
-This entry lets us in on two more Gods: The God of the Seas, and Otonilou, the Goddess of Electricity. That’s about 7 Gods/Goddesses we know about.
-Ilmeris has a constitutional monarchy, and Amidias is the 17th King of the Kingdom of Ilmeris.
Sepulcher
An amalgamation of souls and flesh given new form and purpose via necromancy. This twisted perversion of life is inspired by the auric dragons’ method of revival, though it is plain to see that any grace the dragons may have had is not present here. The school of magic used to create Sepulcher was forbidden in the Deific Era, yet many still practiced it in secrecy.

-Sepulcher was created through necromancy, and it was inspired by the method of the Auric Dragons’s revival.
-The magicks to create Sepulcher were outlawed back in the Deific Era. Despite this, it was practiced in secrecy.

Perversion: An unintended change of something.





Semi-Important Entries

Aero Slime
Previously mundane slimes that have absorbed trace amounts of draconic essence from the outpour of energy caused by the re-enchantment of Aerialite. They now soar the skies with their newly sprouted wings, reaching heights few of their gelatinous kind ever have.

-This is an interesting one. From what we see here, we can infer that even small amounts of Draconic essence are capable of granting powers to those that absorb it. Not quite groundbreaking, but still interesting nonetheless.

Aquatic Aberration
A spawn of the immense Leviathan, their lifespan can be measured in hours. All they know is how to hunt for their masters. Even non-aquatic life is well within their reach, due to their uncanny ability to fly through air just as easily as swimming through water.

-At first glance, this may not appear that important. However, this states that the Leviathan either can reproduce, or that it can create Aquatic Aberrations itself, although they do not survive very long. Aquatic Aberrations also possess the ability to fly through air, which is an uncommon trait among normal sea creatures.
Astralachnea
Once black widows, they have now been reduced to their most basic functions. The effects of the Astral Infection are far more intense underground than it is on the surface, the air heavy with the thick fog and vestiges of the star burrowed deeply into the earth.

-Astralachneas are former Black Widows that have been afflicted by the Astral Infection.
-The Astral Infection’s effects are stronger under the surface of the planet.

Vestiges: A very small amount of something that may no longer exist.
Atlas
Knights of the infection, these fusions of creatures pack an immense punch. Though slow due to their overbearing weight, a single blow from an atlas is easily able to pulverize a monolith. Their hearts continue to slowly beat even after being ripped from their bodies, for their lives seemingly cannot truly end.

-Atlases are incredibly strong monsters that are a fusion of various creatures, presumably due to the Astral Infection’s effects.
-The Infection allows their hearts to stay beating regardless of if it’s in the body or not.
Aurora Spirit
Thought to be no more than an old wives’ tale, sightings of aurora spirits have become commonplace since the defeat of the wall of flesh. Upon closer inspection, it appears these “spirits” are rather wisp-like entities clad in a cryonic shell, a sure sign that these were created by Archmage Permafrost.

-Aurora Spirits are a creation of Permafrost’s.
-After the Wall of Flesh’s defeat, they started appearing quite frequently in the world.
Baby Cannonball Jellyfish
These creatures have been hunted for centuries now. They are widely used as ammunition in ships or even as normal bombs. Despite this, they never truly vanish, as if an external power kept this species alive.

-What power could this entry be referring to… Silva, perhaps?
Baby Ghost Bell
Ghost Bells were bred in large numbers during the Ilmeran war, due to the Ilmerian army needing a staggering amount of electricity to keep Yharim and his forces at bay. Alas, their efforts were for naught, and the kingdom collapsed after the Great Incineration.

-Ghost Bells were the primary source of protection for the Ilmerian army, as they served as protection from Yharim’s forces. Unfortunately, the Ilmerians lost the war anyway, due to having little protection against Calamitas incinerating Ilmeris.
Blight Slimes
Slimes that have absorbed some of the blighted godly essence. Riddled with impurity, they are now more putrid flesh than gelatin and, having taken in such an amount that they seem ready to burst. Yet unlike most slimes which have relatively basic minds, these seem to be collecting mass with a purpose.

-Many slimes are of a simple mind. However, the Blight Slimes are set out to do something, likely given a mission by the Slime God.
-Clearly there is more than meets the eye to these slimes. They’ve been filled with the godly essence that the Crimson and Corruption are filled with, yet haven’t had any major side effects beyond becoming composed partly of flesh, so as the entry states, there is something else at play here. Perhaps it refers to the Slime God.


Blinded Angler
Lacking most normal senses, these predators use a form of biological sonar to ‘see’ their surroundings. The glowing crystals on their backs draw in prey that use the sea’s shimmering prisms as their guiding light, like a moth to the flame.

-Blinded Anglers can sense what’s around them using a sort of sonar, not too far from echolocation.
-The crystals on their back lure creatures in for the Blinded Angler to feast upon.
Bloatfish
More geological than biological, bloatfish have sticky glue-like skin that they use to cover their bodies in voidstone. Though it protects them from predators, their immense weight has sunk them to the deepest parts of the Abyss.

-Bloatfish are heavily protected by their Voidstone-covered skin. They live in the bottom of the Abyss because of their weight.
Bloodworm
Bloodworms are an exceedingly rare creature to stumble upon, as they burrow at the first sign of danger. It takes both exceedingly great patience, wisdom, and agility to catch one, leaving the worms ever having but a single natural predator.

-Mostly self explanatory. Bloodworms are quite evasive creatures, and this entry foreshadows the Old Duke.
Bloom Slime
Imbued with profaned energy, this slime wishes to see the world reduced to ashes to ensure the suffering it brings is no more. However, the simplicity of their form makes it difficult for the slain goddess to fully impose her will onto them.

-This slime contains the energy of the Profaned Goddess, Providence. Due to the fact that they are slimes, their simple forms are hard to be fully forced to obey the Goddess’ will.
-After Providence’s defeat, her energy spread into the world and was imbued into various lifeforms.
Bobbit Worm
Hiding away in the darkest corners of the void to strike at unsuspecting prey, bobbit worms take full advantage of the Abyss’ darkness. To live here, in the most extreme environment in the world, a creature must either be truly mighty, learn to use the environment to survive, or both.

-The very bottom of the Abyss is the most extreme environment in Terraria, where only the strongest creatures are able to survive.
Box Jellyfish
Larger than the average jellyfish, the sting of these persistent pests packs a powerful punch. Though they can be found in most large bodies of water, they are locally extinct around Ilmeris after the Brimstone Witch turned her hexes against the kingdom.

-Box Jellyfish used to live in the Ilmeran Sea, but were driven to extinction in that area after the Incineration. As such, they mostly live in the Ocean and Abyss now
-Their sting is quite strong.
Brimling
Extensions of the Brimstone Elemental herself, and part of her very being. Both she and her Brimlings are of a single mind, so she naturally cares for them just as she cares for herself. When heavily wounded, they withdraw into a cocoon to protect themselves from further harm.

-Brimlings are practically a part of the Brimstone Elemental, so much so that they may as well share the same mind. When they’re near death, they hide themselves within a cocoon in an attempt to protect themselves.
Cataclysmic Construct
A pitiable creation of the clone, made in an attempt to imitate one of the Supreme Witch’s brothers. Yet this and the clone’s other creations have no will of their own, amounting to little more than puppets she controls.

-Calamitas’ Clone was the creator of the clones of Catastrophe and Cataclysm, and she controls them both.
-Both Catastrophe and Cataclysm’s clones are without wills, as such they cannot think for themselves.
Catastrophic Construct
A pitiable creation of the clone, made in an attempt to imitate one of the Supreme Witch’s brothers. Not many would recognize them as such despite her efforts, though a few key characteristics have managed to survive in these abhorrent amalgamations.

-Both Catastrophe and Cataclysm’s clones are failed attempts at recreating Calamitas’ brothers, likely through necromancy. The clones are not completely inaccurate to their namesakes, however, as certain details are still there.

Cloud Elemental
Part of a solitary elemental that rarely appears aside from when her domain is at its strongest. Many attempts were made by what remained of Yharim’s forces to hunt down the Elementals after Azafure fell. Only now that the war has passed do the weaker elementals dare return.

-After Azafure was destroyed, Yharim’s remaining forces hunted out any Elementals that may have remained.
-The Cloud Elemental we see here is merely a part of a whole, explaining why we can see multiple of them in-game.
Cnidrion
Once trained to be the steeds of honored Ilmerian warriors, cnidrions survived the Incineration due to their sheer might. They continue to defend what was once the heart of the sea kingdom from intruders, maintaining a fierce loyalty to their masters even after they have passed on.

-Cnidrions were able to survive the incineration of Ilmeris, and continue to guard where the Ilmeran Kingdom formerly resided.
-Cnidrions are apparently very loyal due to this behavior.
Colossal Squid
These creatures have grown immensely in size and strength due to the effects Silva’s essence has had on them. As they are able to consume the growths she caused directly due to being herbivores in the past, more life flows within them than nearly every other Abyss creature.

-Colossal Squids were not always this big, but only grew after Silva’s influence spread through the Abyss.

Cosmic Lantern
These lanterns possess a magical, distorted flame that radiates no heat whatsoever. If one looks closely into their fire, they may see another world entirely.

-This entry in its entirety is referencing the Distortion, which is where Signus, the creator of these lanterns resides. The “another world” the entry mentions is the Distortion.
Cryo Slime
Slimes enchanted by the Archmage, as a host to crystallize the frozen power of the tundra into a magical metal. He cast a spell to hide away most of his creations and research soon after leaving the Godseeker’s side, well aware that Yharim may attempt to exploit his previous work.

-Permafrost was the person responsible for the Cryo Slimes’ existence, and many of his creations were sealed to avoid Yharim using them.
Cryon
Archmage Permafrost went through great pains to not take part in combat himself, instead molding cryons to act as his personal guardians. Noticing the spread of godly essence just as many other creatures have, they have come out of stasis to combat any signs of it so that they may defend their master.

-Cryons were awakened when the Godly essence contained in the Wall of Flesh was released.
-Permafrost was the one who made Cryons.
Dark Energy
-

-Similar to Ceaseless Void’s entry, this is purposefully left blank, so this is largely going to be speculation on my part.
-Maybe Dark Energy is some sort of Distortion-related creation. This theory has some evidence to back it up, what with Ceaseless Void being a portal to the Distortion, and the Dark Energy inflicting the “Distorted” debuff. It could be some sort of essence of the Distortion itself, or of whatever creature dwells within, but this part of the theory is far more speculatory and has little to back it up, so take it with a grain of salt.
Desert Nuisance
Though these serpents are of the Desert Scourge’s species, they are notably younger and less developed. Choosing to hunt in a pack with the large scourge due to this weakness, many have seen them tear apart prey not unlike the piranhas that once populated the former sea.

-Desert Nuisances are younger versions of the Desert Scourge.
-They are pack hunters, meaning they hunt in large numbers to mitigate their low individual strength.
Draconic Swarmer
Though but an adolescent dragonfolly, it poses a great threat to all around it regardless of its age. Their species survived the draconic purges by reproducing rapidly and becoming highly reclusive, alongside developing a hyper-aggressive nature.

-Draconic Swarmers are adolescent Dragonfollies, yet are still quite powerful.
-Due to their high reproduction rate, they managed to survive through the Draconic genocide.
Draedon
One of the many recon bodies made by, and created in the image of, the enigmatic engineer, Draedon. The scientist has become increasingly reclusive since leaving the Godseeker’s side, devoting every waking moment to his never-ending research.

-The Draedon we see in-game is merely a recon body representing Draedon himself.
-After he left Yharim’s crusade, he proceeded to dedicate himself wholly to his research.
-This recon body’s chair is clean while the recon body itself is rusty, showing that Draedon clearly cares about the chair more than the body itself..
Earth Elemental
After the Brimstone Elemental became dormant, the forgemasters of Azafure used clockwork and crystal to bind the powers of an elemental to a mechanical body. While formidable, it seems the dream of creating a true replacement for an elemental died unfulfilled with Azafure itself.

-The Earth Elemental was created by Azafurian forgemasters in an attempt to create an artificial elemental. Their efforts never came to fruition, however.
Ebonian & Crimulan Paladin
The Slime God avoids direct combat due to its weakness, instead choosing to mold guardians to protect it. These guardians were created from countless blight slimes, their filth acting as a counterweight to the purity of their god.

-The Ebonian and Crimulan Paladins were created by the Slime God as guardians.
Frogfish
Well-camouflaged and prepared to strike at any moment, Frogfish show that the ocean is rarely as serene as it seems. There are few places where one can find true peace here in the heart of what once was an empire unrivaled.

-Frogfish are adept hunters, as they camouflage themselves and wait for prey to come nearby before striking.
-I’m uncertain as to what this “empire unrivaled” could be, although I do have a few theories. As an in-universe theory, this may be referring to an empire that used to reside within the Ocean, potentially one that worshiped Anahita similar to Azafure with the Brimstone Elemental. As an out-of-universe theory, this might be a reference to Atlantis, a sea kingdom from Greek mythology. 
Gamma Slime
A slime overloaded with radiation from Draedon’s long-since abandoned experiments with nuclear energy. Though methods of generating power involving nuclear energy surpassed all others that came before in terms of raw efficiency, not even these advancements were enough to satisfy the enigmatic engineer.

-Draedon’s experiments in the Sulphurous Sea had altered the composition of this slime, filling it with radiation.
-Even though many advancements were made regarding nuclear power, Draedon still needed more efficiency for his experiments.
Ghost Bell
These high-voltage jellyfish can incapacitate most with a single touch, and were a major factor in the Ilmerian army’s strength. The sea kingdom used the electricity produced by Ghost Bells to drive back Yharim’s forces, electrifying the waters so that none could cross their borders.

-Ghost Bells have great power in their sting, and were used to defend Ilmeris during Yharim’s assault.
Great Sand Shark
These intelligent predators once swam the shores of the upper Ilmeran Sea, with many being trained to hold back Yharim’s forces. Yet when the day came, the sand sharks were barely even a distraction for the Supreme Witch, with this particular specimen surviving only by making a hasty retreat.

-The Sand Sharks once lived in the upper Ilmeran Sea, and they were trained in an attempt to hinder Yharim’s forces. They could not defend Ilmeris forever, as Calamitas incinerated the Sea. The Great Sand Shark we see in-game was supposedly the only survivor of its species that day.
Heat Spirit
Citizens of Azafure who committed heinous crimes were cast out of the city and forced to don unremovable obsidian skulls as a mark of their sins, to let all know of their vile acts. Now the lost souls of those who were exiled are finally able to return home after the city’s fall, the skulls they wore being all that remains of them.

-Heat Spirits were once citizens of Azafure, but they were exiled due to committing unforgivable crimes. After their death and Azafure’s fall, they returned as mere souls, keeping the sins of their past lives with them in the form of obsidian skulls.
Ice Clasper
Though their exact origins are an enigma, what is known is that these ethereal beings seek to stamp out any and all sources of warmth that exist in their home. Due to this fact, and taking into account the fossil record, many speculate that ice claspers may have played a vital role in the tundra’s creation.

-Ice Claspers are incredibly ancient creatures, with fossil records dating them back to the creation of the tundra. 
Impious Immolator
An idol carved in the image of Her, it is lit ablaze with the crafter’s lifeforce. After all, what weight does one’s life hold when one wishes to see the world wreathed in Her holy flames?

-Totally not a reference to Xenoblade Chronicles 3 Flame Clocks
In all seriousness, this is an interesting entry because it gives more insight into Providence’s following. Many of her followers care not about their own lives, they only care about achieving Providence’s goal.
Nova
Warped yet simple creatures created from but stardust and mana, containing a volatile nucleus within. They feel that they must defend the infection despite lacking proper means of even defending themselves, and so all they can do to ward off intruders is overcharge their nucleus, causing themselves to combust.

-Despite not having a proper way to attack intruders, Novae do have a self-destruct method to detonate themselves if necessary.
Nuclear Terror
The effects of our actions are never immediately obvious. Centuries of poison and constant fighting for its own life created such monstrosity, now dragged to the shore by the unrelenting torrents. Whatever it may have been before, all that is left now is its will to survive.

-The constant pollution of the Sulphurous Sea and the hostile environment it provided has led to the Nuclear Terror’s creation.
Orthocera
Though radiation normally slowly kills living things, thanks to Silva’s influence keeping creatures in the Sulphurous Sea alive, mutations caused by radiation will rarely reawaken lost genes and traits. These creatures are but one such example.

-Silva’s lasting influence is able to keep the Sulphurous Sea’s inhabitants alive.
-Sometimes due to this influence, radiation-caused mutations can cause genes to reappear in certain creatures.
Overloaded Soldier
A body given life again, overflowing with the souls of warriors that perished during the Crusade who were unable to find peace. Their ravenous hunger for battle has been reignited due to sensing godly essences in the land once more.

-Overloaded Soldiers are soldiers that died during Yharim’s Crusade, whether that be soldiers that opposed Yharim or soldiers that were part of Yharim’s army.
Pestilent Slime
The virus hunts for any openings within one’s body to reprogramme all to serve the enigmatic engineer. The gelatinous body of slimes are particularly easy to infest, yet with no neural system, slimes are unable to receive direct orders, processing them as vague suggestions at best.

-The Plague virus serves to reprogram any and all creatures to serve Draedon’s will.
Plague Charger
Spawn of the Plaguebringers, these were born already taken by Draedon’s nanomachines. Nanites ensure they reach adulthood in a matter of hours by supercharging their aging process, even if this means their lifespan can be counted in days. Yet, this is exactly what makes them the perfect dispensable soldiers.

-Plague Chargers were born already infected by the Plague.
-Due to their upbringing, they have incredibly short lifespans.
-The Plague is partially composed of nanites, which are able to age creatures at an abnormal rate.
Profaned Energy
Those most devout to Her travel the world, being planted into societies and acting as spies and assassins. Among their duties is constructing shrines in Her honor infused with Her divine power, that She might bless pagans blinded by darkness with visions of Her new age of light.

-The most devoted of Providence’s followers travel across the world to try to spread Her faith, as well as work as spies and assassins. 

Devout: Deeply committed to a faith.
Pagan: Holding religious beliefs that aren’t of the main religion(s).
Radiator
A species of once near-extinct sea slugs that have learned to carry crystallized depleted plutonium on their backs to dissuade predators, rather than relying on toxins that most creatures in the Sulfurous Sea are now immune to. Though radiation is detrimental to most life, it has curiously been an opportunity for some.

-Strangely, Radiators have benefited from radiation.
-They carry crystallized plutonium on their backs as a defensive measure.
-Plutonium is likely the radioactive fuel that Draedon had been dumping in the Sulphurous Sea. 
Reaper Shark
Apex predators of the void, these sharks take advantage of both their stealthiness and might to hunt anything and everything that comes near. Using their arms for purposes from hurling colossal squids into the Abyss’ walls to crushing the heavily armored heads of eidolon wyrms, few can match their raw strength.

-Reaper Sharks are the apex predators of the Abyss.
-They use their arms to battle any who may oppose them.
Scorn Eater
For one to be weak of will does not inherently mean they are weak of body. Within these powerful individuals does a powerful fire burn, and She is all too willing to fan the flames. All one need give in return for Her gracious blessing is their free will, and they shall be gifted Her enlightenment.

-The followers of Providence that have been granted Her blessing are without free will.
Shockstorm Shuttle
Mining devices and scouts for a civilization from a long lost world. They now seek whatever resources are left on other nearby planets, and perhaps even this world as a potential replacement for their ruined home.

-Could be referring to Martians?
-Wherever these came from, they’re scouting out Terraria for resource gathering and potentially even use it as a new homeland.
Soul Seeker
The Clone’s attempt at wielding the souls of the damned as weapons, these retain slightly more autonomy than their Azafurian brethren. And yet given the striking resemblance the bear to the Clone’s shell, it’s arguable that they might be further from Calamitas’ current Soul Seekers than those found in Azafure’s ruins.

-Soul Seekers are creations of the Calamitas Clone that resemble the Soul Slurpers of Azafure.
-Despite the fact they resemble the Clone’s shell, they’re likely closer to the Soul Slurpers of Azafure than they are to Calamitas’ Soul Seekers.
Soul Seeker (Supreme)
Created through a marriage of brimstone magic and necromancy, these foul beings serve their master’s whims unflinchingly. What they lack in sheer power they make up for in both sheer numbers and their coordinated attacks.

-These Soul Seekers were created through brimstone magic and necromancy, and serve Calamitas without fail.
-They aren’t very strong individually, but when they attack together they are a fierce foe.
Soul Slurper
An early form of Calamitas’ Soul Seekers, summoned by the Witch during her conflict with the Brimstone Elemental. Unlike the refined form that would follow it, she possessed very little control of them, leading to her creations going rogue shortly after the arduous battle was finally over.

-Soul Slurpers are an early form of the Soul Seekers that Calamitas summoned during her fight with the Brimstone Elemental.
-Calamitas had little control of the Soul Slurpers when she created them, so they went rogue after the battle.
Stormlion
Some survivors of Ilmeris’ downfall claim that enough magical lightning surged through the sea during its final days that there existed not a single drop of water without levin coursing through it. Even now, electricity from the battle remains buried in the sands, with several antlions having learned to both channel and harness the former kingdom’s power.

-So much magic lightning was flowing through the Ilmeran Sea during its stand against Yharim’s forces that not one drop of water existed without lightning in it.
-Stormlions are antlions that managed to use the electricity from then.

Levin: Lightning, thunderbolts.








Minor Worldbuilding Entries

??? 
A lure created by the Water Elemental, Anahita. It sings so sweetly, its voice full of promise and warmth, but beware: follow the siren’s call at your own peril.

-Not much to say about this one. It does foreshadow that you’ll end up killing this to summon Anahita though, so that’s something to note.
Acid Eel 
Though they are predators themselves, acid eels lay near the bottom of the Sulphur Sea’s food chain. Their diet largely consists of mollusks, thanks to their ability to squirm into tight crevices. This paired with their speed and camouflage assist them in avoiding becoming meals for others.

-A small look into the Sulphurous Sea’s ecosystem through the Acid Eel. According to this, creatures need to be swift and evasive to survive in the Sulphurous Sea.
Androomba
One of the most mundane of Draedon’s creations, the directive of Androombas is simply to tidy up his labs and domiciles. He and his scientists could not afford to waste time on menial labor when there was endless research to be done.

-Androombas, as the name describes, act as the cleaning services of Draedon’s laboratories. 
-Draedon has scientists working with him (or for him), his research is not a solo effort.

Domicile: A country of permanent residence.
Androomba Pal
Reverse-engineered Androombas that have been retrofitted to spread the Steampunker’s solutions rather than clean dust and debris off of floors. They can be used to purify the world– or ruin it further, if one so desires.

-Self explanatory for the most part, this entry references how the Clentaminator Solutions can be used to purify or corrupt the world.
Anthozoan Crab
Though disguised as simple rocks, they are capable of hurling entire boulders at creatures with ease, and will retreat swiftly if approached. Elsewhere, a creature such as this would thrive due to its might; yet in such a hostile environment as this, this much is required merely to survive.

-Another entry describing the evolutionary requirements of living in the Sulphurous Sea, similarly to the Acid Eel. This reinforces what I said about the Acid Eel entry, that creatures need to be evasive to survive here.
Aquatic Urchin
Closely related to sea urchins, aquatic urchins have been forced to adapt to the acidic water and radioactive waste. Normally their spikes would normally deter predators, but in the environment it lives in, a painful meal is still a meal. Nothing in this sea can afford to be a picky eater.

-Here, we see a description of the harshness of the Sulphurous Sea’s ecosystem, and how creatures need to eat nearly anything that they can find in order to survive.
Aries
These creatures bound across the landscape endlessly, chasing down any intruders that dare enter the hive mind’s home. The star’s power has bestowed them limitless stamina, rendering them unable to feel exhaustion.

-It’s not really clear what this creature was before being afflicted with the Astral Infection. However, this entry refers to something called “the star”, which may be the star that the Astral Infection was borne from.
Armored Digger
Despite being relatively primitive compared to Draedon’s current technology, armored diggers continue to see use to this day. Though their primary directive is mining and delivering minerals, they also once cleared room for the numerous underground laboratories.

-Armored Diggers are some of Draedon’s earlier creations, and they still serve as a mining device.
-These are partially responsible for the creation of the Arsenal Labs.
Astral Probe
What were once simply common birds have been transmuted by the overwhelming amounts of mana. Though weak on their own, they choose to harass those who are unassimilated while the victim attempts to fight off other infected beasts.

-Astral Probes were formerly birds before being afflicted by the Astral Infection’s influence. While they may not be that powerful by themselves, they often hunt those that the Astral Infection cannot affect along with other affected creatures.
Astral Slime
With slimes already acclimated to absorbing both matter and energy from the environment, it is a trivial matter for the star’s mana to overtake the gelatinous creatures of this land. But the slimes care not, for little about their existence is changed.

-A rare case where the Astral Infection changes little about its host, as slimes share a similar goal as the Infection..

Acclimated: Accustomed to.
Baby Flak Crab
Adolescent flak crabs make no attempt to fight off predators, and simply flee from any threats. Their species only learns to pelt their targets from afar later in life, leaving the adolescents defenseless and dependent on their parents.

-The attack instinct of Flak Crabs is not inherent knowledge, and the babies rely largely on adult Flak Crabs to protect them.
Bandit
The bandit may have a bad habit of looting battlefields and taking what isn’t theirs, but their actions are mostly motivated by their hatred of the obscenely rich who haven’t truly earned the wealth they possess. Their methods are somewhat shady, but can always be relied upon to get a job done.

-The Bandit steals from those who have gained their money in bad ways. However, they are generally trustworthy, despite their questionable methods.
Belching Coral
Although all coral is alive to some extent, this species possesses above average intelligence. They are capable of fending off creatures attempting to consume them by releasing pressurized bursts of sulfuric gas when approached. Occasionally, this process makes a noise resembling music.

-Belching Corals are incredibly intelligent for being coral. They can defend themself by spewing sulfurous gasses at attackers, and sometimes it can make a musical sound, referring to the Belching Saxophone.
Calamity Eye
Born from the ashes of the battle between the witch and the elemental, these eye-like creatures are the weakest and most mundane of the Crag’s new inhabitants. Yet even they pose a threat to those who intrude upon their sacred grounds.

-Calamity Eyes were created after Azafure’s destruction, and are the weakest inhabitants of the ruins of the city.
Cannonball Jellyfish
These jellyfishes help keep the Abyss clean from the sulphuric poisoning. Unlike most hard-skinned creatures in the Sulphurous Sea, they instead use their stingers to drain the acid near them to later use it for self-defense.

-Cannonball Jellyfish help clean the acidic waters of the Sulphurous Sea by draining the acid around them, then storing it in their stingers for later use.
Chaotic Puffer
These creatures inhale trace amounts of scoria in the water while inflating, heating the liquid inside of them immensely. Hot enough to melt iron in this state, they cause horrific burns to those they make contact with, and predators attempting to consume them are boiled from the inside out.

-Chaotic Puffers are capable of heating themselves to extreme temperatures when they inflate themselves due to the scoria they inhale.

Clam
Clams once lived in the upper portion of the Ilmeran Sea before the Incineration, being forced to relocate after the battle. Though it was thanks in part to their adaptability and hardiness that their species survived, luck was also certainly on their side.

-As many other creatures from the Sunken Sea were, Clams were displaced due to the Incineration. Fortunately, the Clams were greatly benefitted by their evolution, yet they were also quite lucky in their escape. This is in fact referencing Pearls, which make Luck Potions.
Corrupt Slime Spawn
Slimes are extraordinarily hardy creatures: if a large slime has chunks of living gelatin severed from it, the chunks tend to continue on, albeit as their own beings. Even as gel, a slime is still technically alive– it simply exists in a state where it cannot function in any meaningful way.

-The smaller slimes summoned by the Slime God are parts of the Ebonian and Crimulan Paladins.
Cosmic Guardian
Though of the same species as the nameless serpent, their minds and functions are far more basic. They possess very little will of their own and blindly follow the orders of their gluttonous master.

-Cosmic Guardians are related to the Devourer of Gods.
-They don’t really think for themselves, they merely follow the Devourer’s orders.
Cragmaw Mire
A mostly immobile creature that dwells in the depths of the radioactive wasteland, it boasts an exoskeleton harder than titanium to defend its core. To compensate for its lack of movement, it has formed a symbiotic relationship with a worm that reels in prey in exchange for protection.

-Cragmaw Mires are incredibly resilient due to their exoskeleton, but they cannot move much due to this. Aorm gathers prey for the Cragmaw Mire in exchange for being protected.
Crimson Slime Spawn
Slimes are extraordinarily hardy creatures: if a large slime has chunks of living gelatin severed from it, the chunks tend to continue on, albeit as their own beings.They even retain the memories of the original slime, and so continue to work in the interest of their “parent”.

-The small slimes summoned by the Slime God are technically extensions of the Crimulan and Ebonian Paladins.
Crimson Slime Spawn (Spiked)
Though many slimes may get objects stuck partway inside of it and learn to use them as weapons, these slimes are a unique case. The spikes of these slimes are a natural part of them, heavily sharpened so that they may impale those who dare defy their god.

-These slimes were created with spikes inside of them, built as a defense mechanism to protect the Slime God.
Cuttlefish
Using natural camouflage to hide from greater predators and catch unsuspecting prey, Cuttlefish wait patiently on the ground for their time to strike. They chase other creatures relentlessly once disturbed, with ferocity enough to scare off any of their would-be predators.

-Cuttlefish are incredibly aggressive towards creatures that bother them, and they are skilled hunters.
Despair Stone
Constructs created from slabs of Brimstone, given life by warlocks that remain in Azafure. Able to accelerate to blistering speeds thanks to their wheel-like design, their sole purpose is to make sure that none dare trespass on their masters’ lands.

-Azafurian warlocks, likely the Renegade Warlocks we see ingame, are the reasons why Despair Stones are alive.
-They act as guardians of the ruins of Azafure.
Devilfish
So called for their demonic horns, Devilfish absorb the fumes left behind by Azafure’s pollution, using the flames to empower themselves. The Abyss’ lower layers are largely unmarred by waste and toxins thanks to these enigmatic creatures.

-Devilfish are strengthened by absorbing the polluted fumes of Azafure. Due to this, the lower layers of the Abyss are generally clean. 
Eutrophic Ray
Eutrophic Rays have formed a commensalistic relationship with Ghost Bells. The rays can store energy given by the Ghost Bells for electrical muscle stimulation, allowing for great bursts of speed.

-Eutrophic Rays use Ghost Bells to gain speed boosts. This doesn’t harm or benefit the Ghost Bells.

Commensalistic: Beneficial for one organism and neither beneficial nor harmful for the other.
Flak Crab
Needing to hide themselves from the roaming creatures, flak crabs disguise themselves as the sulfurous gas vents scattered across the Sulphurous Sea. As they reproduce quickly, stumbling upon these and their offspring is a rather common occurrence.

-Flak Crabs try to resemble sulfurous vents in order to hide from predators.
-They reproduce very quickly, so they appear quite often.
Fusion Feeder
Bloated with mana, the immense amount of magical power has dulled the instincts of this former sand shark, its movements now slow and sluggish. Its need for food has been permanently sated, and it now thirsts only for distant stars.

-Fusion Feeders used to be sand sharks before the Astral Infection took their minds, as such they’ve been slowed down considerably.
-They now desire the mana that stars are composed of, and they no longer need food.
Gem Crawlers
Relatives to the Ilmeran Sea’s prismbacks. The aquatic lizards ended up in the wild after being taken in as pets, though without the proper nutrients to grow prisms on their back, many grew the next best thing– precious gems.


-This entry is shared by all Gem Crawlers, so it’s labeled as such.
-Here, this entry mentions that the Gem Crawlers are related to creatures from the Sunken Sea, specifically the Prism-Backs. Here we see that in order to grow the prisms on their backs, they require proper nutrition, and a lack of that leads to growing gemstones instead.
Giant Clam
Clams slowly crystalise ambient magic around themselves into pearls, and as they grow larger, so too do their pearls. Upon growing to their full size, they are classified as Giant Clams, and gain the ability to use the magic stored in their pearls to some degree.

-The pearls that Giant Clams make are infused with magic, and once they become really large, they have a somewhat limited ability to use the magic in the pearls.
Giant Squid
Squid are known to be cannibalistic animals, having few qualms with consuming their own kind when in need of food. Quite ironically, this creature’s main predator is itself.

-Giant Squids are their own worst enemy.
Gnasher
Though gnashers are relatively slow, these mutated snapping turtles boast an unnaturally strong shell. Attempting to kill and eat one would injure most creatures greatly due to its terrifying biting power and its spiked shell that’s hard as stone and easily capable of impaling flesh.

-Gnashers are mutated snapping turtles (they don’t eat pizza in the sewers though).
-Their shell is incredibly hard, and the spikes on their back are sharp enough to pierce through flesh.
Gulper Eel
Though sluggish and bulky, these eels traverse the abyss with surprising ease. They blend into the darkness, with a mouth that can stretch abnormally wide used to slowly swallow prey whole. Their meals are left unaware of their predicament until it is far too late.

-Gulper Eels are silent hunters, despite their size.
Hadarian
Once mere desert vultures, they have been metamorphosed into new beings, their feathers stripped and replaced with gooey tissue and stone-like plating. They sit still as a statue, with eyes seemingly staring at both everything, and nothing at all.

-Hadarians were formerly vultures before being afflicted with the Astral Infection, and they act as the info gatherers of the Star.
Hive
Amalgamations of several creatures, with all of their features rendered unrecognizable after being fused into a singular being. Unable to act on their own due to its immense mass, hives choose instead to split off small parts of themselves to fight for them.

-Hives are many creatures meshed into one.
-They cannot move due to being incredibly heavy.
Hiveling
Hivelings may be rather unthreatening alone, though dangerous in large numbers. Being simply extensions of a hive, they lack a preservation instinct, and fight ferociously to the death so that they may serve the greater whole.

-Hivelings are parts of Hives, and they are often suicidal when it comes to defending the Hive.
Hive Tumor
This tumor acts as the brain of the putrid wasteland, being all that is left of the minds of the slain gods that lay there. The creatures of the Corruption exist to protect it, and those who attempt to harm it rarely live to tell the tale.

-Hive Tumors are parts of the minds of slain Gods.
Infernal Congealment
A lava slime that has absorbed pieces of the charred stone left behind by the Brimstone Elemental. Despite its simple nature, these creatures are just as much of a threat as the rest of the Crag’s current inhabitants.

-Similarly to many other ore slimes, Infernal Congealments were formed by absorbing the material it represents. Brimstone Elemental seems to be responsible for Infernal Suevite’s existence.
Irradiated Slime
Though slime is known to fall from the sky on occasion, slime in the sky condenses far quicker here in the Sulphurous Sea, as its air is thick with sulfur and radiation. It isn’t uncommon for full sized slimes to fall from the heavens during acid rain storms, never mind a fully-fledged slime rain.

-Slimes fall from the sky far more often here in the Sulphurous Sea, especially during the Acid Rains, due to the radiation in the air.
Luminous Corvina
Lumenyl grows on the fins of these exotic corvina, making these creatures one of the few sources of light in the Abyss. It survives by guiding what would be its predators to other prey, signaling where it is by emitting a shrill pulse.

-Luminous Corvina have Lumenyl growing on their fins.
-They manage to survive in the Abyss despite their bright fins by diverting attention to other prey. 
Mantis
The most versatile organism born from the Astral Infection, mantises can reach incredible speeds and are equipped with claws capable of slicing through all but the most durable metals with ease. When their foes are at a distance, they are capable of condensing latent mana in the air to form bladed disks they can throw at their enemies.

-Mantises are very fast, and their claws are quite sharp. The disks they use to attack enemies from afar are formed from mana in the air.
Mantis Shrimp
Though a variety of answers are given when one asks adventurers about dangerous creatures, few aside from sailors will mention the small yet mighty Mantis Shrimp. Their strikes are so swift that the energy generated from them heats the water to temperatures rivaling the magma of Azafure.

-Mantis Shrimp are incredibly powerful little guys, with their punches matching the heat of Azafurian magma.
Mauler
Powerful radiation has caused prehistoric genes to reawaken in this shark, granting it overwhelming speed and strength. The insatiable hunger of this beast draws it to the shoreline during acidic rainstorms for a feeding frenzy.

-Maulers had genes in them from prehistoric times, possibly from close to the start of the shark species. They have an insatiable hunger that makes them head to the shores of the Sulphurous Sea during Acid Rains.
Melter
While its frailty compared to other plague creatures appears to be a rather glaring weakness, the melters are able to spread the plague quicker than any other creature. Though it may cost them their lives, Melters contain a mechanism that causes them to explode upon death, leaving little uninfected in their wake.

-Melters have a self-destruct mechanism that allows them to spread the Plague upon death.
Mirage Jelly
Using the light refracted from lumenyl crystals and water warmed by the scorching heat of scoria, these jellyfish can create afterimages of themselves to confuse predators, or catch prey of their own.

-Mirage Jellies can create, well, mirages using light from Lumenyl and Scoria-heated water.
Moray Eel
When a fish bites your heel and it looks like an eel, that’s a moray. When it swims in the reef and has two sets of teeth, that’s a moray. When you’re slapped in the face with a slimy embrace, that’s a moray.

-When the eel hunts you down and it doesn’t have a frown, that’s a moray. When it hits you with venom and doesn’t wear some denim, that’s a moray.
-(Ok that was me being stupid so here’s an actual note)
-Moray Eels are narrow fish of the eel species, and they are fierce hunters.
Nanodroid
Ambient lighting, total surveillance, instantaneous repair… With enough of these tiny machines working in unison, any problem is solvable.

-Nanodroids are likely responsible, at least in part, for the upkeep of the Arsenal Labs.
Nuclear Toad
These toads expand like a pufferfish when creatures are near and burst when in danger. The otherwise terrifying inhabitants of the sea have learned well to avoid these critters due to their particularly explosive nature.

-Nuclear Toads are feared by the other creatures of the Sulphurous Sea due to their explosive nature.
Oarfish
Oarfishes are known for laying thousands or even millions of eggs in astonishingly quick gestation cycles. These eggs are the most abundant source of food in the Abyss, being part of the reason even the smallest and least threatening creatures can live in the otherwise near inhospitable depths of the sea.

-Oarfish have incredibly rapid reproduction rates, even potentially laying millions of eggs in their gestation cycles. Many creatures in the Abyss feed off these eggs to survive.
Perforator Cyst
This twitching and convulsing pile of gore acts as the heart of the Perforator Hive, harvesting what small amount of diluted Ichor flowing through the Crimson is left and feeding it to the Hive. Little else is known about it, for those who dare to disturb it have become indistinguishable from the landscape.

-Perforator Cysts harvest Ichor within the Crimson and feed it to the Perforator Hive.

Convulsing: Involuntarily contracting, especially of a muscle.
Plagueshell
A turtle’s shell and nervous system are intertwined, making Giant Tortoises ideal targets for the Plague. Whatever pain is caused by the process of drilling into their shells is rapidly anesthetized, putting the tortoises under control without a single protest.

-Giant Tortoises’ nervous system runs through their shells, which makes them ideal for Plague experiments.
Prismback
Due to the beautiful prisms and calm behavior, these animals have been taken in as pets by many over the course of centuries, even outside of Ilmeris. Though far too slow and bulky to hunt normally, the sea prisms on their back act as a lure for small fish.

-Prismbacks were often treated as pets in the past.
Renegade Warlock
Victims caught in the crossfire during the battle between Calamitas and the Brimstone Elemental, cursed to wander the ruins of their former home for all eternity. Their final moments were spent clinging to life, and in death they seek survival by using the very magicks that slaughtered them.

-Renegade Warlocks were citizens of Azafure during its destruction.
-They now wander the ruins of Azafure, and use the magicks that caused their deaths.
Repair Unit
These handy little helpers are the reason that Draedon’s decades-old labs stand to this day. Though bulkier and less energy efficient than nanodroids, having to take what power they need from the labs’ generators, they can easily clean up the dust, though struggle with the rust.

-As you might expect from the name, Repair Units take care of maintenance of the Arsenal Labs.
-Also Rust and Dust reference
Rimehound
These hounds were bred and trained to survive in the tundra’s hostile conditions by Yharim’s forces, so that they may act as scouts. Most were simply abandoned by their masters out of either necessity or choice, and were resigned to roam forever without purpose.

-Yharim’s forces used Rimehounds as scouts in the tundra.
Rotdog
Fast and furious, these hounds prowl the night, hunting prey with their razor sharp teeth. They are similar in nature to the demon eyes, both being spawned from the same vile mire, yet these creatures are tailored made to end those who have proven themselves a threat to it.

-Rotdogs and Demon Eyes were created by the same source.
Scryllar
Vengeful spirits of those who lost their lives during the clash between Calamitas and the Elemental, now forever bound to their home. Those who were close enough to bear witness to the battle perished in it, leaving few to know the truth of the battle’s outcome.

-More dead from the destruction of Azafure.
-Very few know entirely what happened on that day, as any who were close enough to see the battle died.
Sea Floaty
Flatworms can be found in many seas and oceans across the world, and are exceptional at fitting through cracks or crevices due to their thin bodies. These particular flatworms only ever inhabited the lower sea, and were left entirely unthreatened by the carnage that annihilated most species’ homes.

-Sea Floaties are a species of flatworm, and avoided the destruction caused by the Incineration due to living in the lower portion of the Ilmeran Sea.
Sea Minnow
Schools of sea minnows were one of the most beautiful things one could witness during the days when Ilmeris was unshattered. Those permitted into the kingdom would gather to see these fish swimming in the open sea… yet, this is but a distant past now, even for the minnows themselves.

-Sea Minnow schools were a popular sight in Ilmeris before the Incineration.
Sea Serpent
Despite being one of the few carnivorous creatures to have ever existed in the Ilmeran Sea, even these serpents are unusually passive towards those they do not consider prey by the standards of elsewhere. The sea has only ever known one truly aggressive predator, and it abandoned a life of calming solitude years ago.

-Sea Serpents are a carnivore, which is rare in the Sunken Sea.
-The second half of the entry likely references the Desert Scourge.
Sea Urchin
Massive urchins that roll and hop their way across the sea floor, catching both fish hiding in the sand thanks to their spikes that allow them to comb the sea floor and those far above with their incredible leaps. Their surprising size is due to this species’ carnivorous diet, rather than consuming plants like most types of urchins.

-Sea Urchins are carnivores, which is unlike other urchins.
-Their spikes allow them to catch fish that hide in the sand.
Sightseer Spitter
What once were wandering eyes have been transformed into something else entirely. Rather than attempting to rush their enemies, they now primarily spit an infectious saliva from what was their mouths as a weapon. 

-These guys were formerly Wandering Eyes, but got infected by the Astral Infection. They essentially fire saliva to attack other creatures.
Sightseer Collider
Originally demon eyes, these now act as an extension of the dead star. Unlike the larger variants, these sightseers lack the ability to spit at their enemies. All they are capable of is ramming into those who intrude upon land taken by the Astral Infection with a questionable amount of success.

-These were formerly Demon Eyes before the Infection took them. Unlike Sightseer Spitters, these do not possess a ranged attack, so they attempt to ram into enemies instead.
Skyfin
Too weak to hunt in the waters below, skyfins instead use their wing-like fins to take to the sky and generally feast on insects or even small birds that dare wander near the sea. However, they are also able to hunt larger prey on land by fighting in packs and using hit and run tactics.

-Skyfins are able to fly due to their wing-like fins.
-They hunt in packs to take down larger prey.
Stellar Culex
Their pincers work not only as a weapon, but as a means of spreading the star further. By digging their claws into the ground, they are capable of infecting nearby caves with the help of their supercharged cores.

-The pincers on a Stellar Culex are capable of spreading the Astral Infection.
-When they dig their claws into the ground, they can infect caverns with help from their cores.
Sulflounder
A relative to certain hadopelagic creatures living in the depths, the Sulflounders are a branch in their evolution with a fragile exterior. This allowed them not to sink to the bottom of the Abyss, though their flesh is barely enough to withstand the acidic water.

-Sulfounders are likely related to Bloatfish, due to the wording of this entry.
-While they are lighter than their abyssal brethren, they can barely survive the waters in their habitat.
Sulphurous Skater
Though their exoskeleton provides minimal protection, their deceptively light weight allows them to run on water. These curious insects are even known to ride acidic bubbles for better vantage points and to escape being devoured by surfacing sea creatures.

-Due to their light weight, Sulphurous Skaters are able to run on water.
-They can ride the acidic bubbles in the Sulphurous Sea to escape from predators and gain vantage points.
Sunskater
To the civilization that lived far above clouds, sunskaters were seen as a good omen. These creatures inspired hope in those who saw them, that their society might live on for as long as the sun’s light bathes the world.

-Sunskaters were considered a good omen to the unnamed sky island civilization, and they inspired hope in those who saw them.
Toxicatfish
Though these fish once threatened none other than their prey, the radiation from nuclear waste generated from Draedon’s old experiments has rotted both their bodies and minds. Attacking anything that comes near, this once flourishing species is now on the verge of extinction.

-Nuclear waste from Draedon’s experiments caused Toxicatfish’s minds and bodies to rot.
-They are close to extinction due to their new aggressive behavior.
Toxic Minnow
These abnormally large minnows have evolved to use nutrients from plants they consume to create toxins inside their body, which is then released after they die. They have next to no predators due to this, and contribute nearly nothing to their environment.

-Toxic Minnows use the nutrients from plants to create the toxins that we see them use. Due to this, they have few predators.
Trasher
Despite being equipped with a mouth large enough to swallow a child whole, these crocodiles simply act as scavengers, devouring scraps and bones left over from predators’ meals. Needing to conserve energy due to eating relatively little, they rarely move at their full speed unless they feel threatened.

-Trashers don’t eat much, due to their scavenging lifestyle. As such, they try to conserve energy as much as possible.
Trilobite
These aquatic arthropods make leaps and bounds in both water and air despite possessing shells like stone, both in texture and weight. Thanks to their immense shells, they are capable of passing through predators’ digestion systems unscathed.

-Trilobite shells are incredibly heavy and stone-like. These same shells allow them to pass through their predators’ digestive systems with little to no harm.
Twinkler
These infected fireflies exist solely as prey, guiding unsuspecting creatures to the star for assimilation that would not be driven to it otherwise.

-These serve as nothing more than prey for other creatures to potentially be taken by the Astral Infection.
Viperfish
Omnivorous fish that dwell in the middle sections of the Abyss, viperfish rest firmly near the bottom of the food chain. Their wide mouth normally reserved for filter feeding can double as a means to scare off predators by mimicking the much more threatening gulper eels.

-Viperfish are filter feeders that are very low on the food chain, and they survive by mimicking Gulper Eels with their wide mouth.
Viruling
Unlike Derplings who use their proboscis to drain the blood of other creatures, Virulings use theirs by using it to inject the plague directly into their victims. Aside from the Plaguebringers themselves, no creature is nearly as efficient at contaminating the local wildlife.

-Virulings are infected Derplings who use their proboscis to infect other creatures with the Plague.
Wulfrum Amplifier
These amplifiers empower fellow wulfrum machines through a surprisingly advanced tesla field. While the field is harmless to any organic beings that pass through it, wulfrum machines are designed to receive energy from it which allows them to run at peak efficiency.

-The tesla fields that Wulfrum Amplifiers make are harmless to organic creatures.
Wulfrum Drone
The purpose the wulfrum machines once fulfilled can most clearly be seen through the drones: to harass the basic troopers of Yharim’s forces. They were not threatening enough to be a priority target, though their laser attacks could be quite deadly if allowed to fully power up.

-The Wulfrum enemies were once intended to harass Yharim’s normal troops, though they were very rarely a large threat.
Wulfrum Gyrator
One of the more advanced Wulfrum machines, they hop and roll unpredictably in an attempt to throw off any attacks from afar. Gyrators are not very threatening on their own, and were mostly deployed to defend other more important machines.

-Wulfrum Gyrators generally serve as a distraction method to defend more important machines.
Wulfrum Hovercraft
Though they may seem advanced, even a novice engineer can create hovercrafts such as these. They can’t pack much firepower, and their armor may be thin, but these Wulfrum creations' true strength lies in being versatile and easy to repurpose into other projects.

-Despite their advanced appearance, Wulfrum Hovercraft are actually quite simple.
-Wulfrum is generally versatile and can be repurposed easily if necessary.
Wulfrum Rover 
The most simple of the Wulfrum Machines, and the honorary mascot of those who rebelled against Yharim. Its small stature and eager movements may remind some of a dog, but don't be deceived; in the chaos of battle, a Rover is still dangerous.

-Wulfrum Rovers act as the honorary mascot of people who rebelled against Yharim.





Hello! This is the new lore document dictator. This doc will be updated whenever new lore releases (teasers don't count since they are ultimately WIP). Octo out :3c



